6. Aparādha-phole mama
----------------------

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam

(1) The sixth verse of the Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam is as follows:

nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā
vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā
pulakair nichitaṁ vapuḥ kadā
tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati

(2) “Oh Lord, when will tears flow from my eyes like waves, And my voice tremble in ecstasy? When will the hairs of my body stand on end while chanting Your Holy Name?”

aparādha-phole mama    chitta bhela vajra sama
tuyā nāme nā lobhe bikāra
hatāś hoiya hari    tava nāma ucha kori
boḍo duḥkhe ḍāki bāro bāro

(3) Oh Lord Hari, asa result of my offences incurred in previous lifetimes, my heart has become as hard as a thunderbolt, and feels no change upon chanting Your Holy Name. Disappointed, hopeless, and in great distress, I loudly call Your Name again and again.

dīna dayāmoy karuṇā-nidān
bhāva-bindu dei rākhoho parāṇ

(4) Oh Lord, you are compassionate towards the fallen souls and the origin of mercy. Please give me a drop of divine ecstasy and thereby save my life!

kobe tuyā nāma-uchāraṇe mor
nayane jharabo daro daro lor

(5) When will an incessant stream of tears flow from my eyes as I chant Your Name in divine ecstasy?

gada-gada-svara kaṇṭhe upajabo
mukhe bolo ādha ādha bāhirābo

(6) When will my voice be choked with divine emotion, and when will words garbled due to ecstasy come from my mouth?

pulake bharabo śorīra hāmāra
sveda-kampa-stambha hobe bāro bāro

(7) When will the hairs of my body stand up in ecstasy? When will I become stunned with ecstasy, shiver and perspire out of the ecstasy of divine love? When will these symptoms of ecstasy overwhelm me again and again?

bibarṇa-śorīre hārāobu̐ jñāna
nāma-samāśraye dharobu parāṇa

(8) When will my body turn colours and become pale out of ecstasy? When will I lose consciousness? And when will my very life be under the shelter of the Holy Name?

milabo hāmār kiye aiche dina
roye bhakativinoda mati hīna

(9) Bhakti Vinod, who is devoid of good intelligence cries, “When will I meet with such a day?”


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/aparadha-phole-mama