7a. Gāite gāite nāma
--------------------

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam

(1) The seventh verse of the Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam is as follows:

yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa
chakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitaṁ
śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ
govinda-viraheṇa me

(2) “Oh Govinda! Without You, the world is empty. Tears are flooding my eyes like rain, and a moment seems like forever.”

gāite gāite nāma ki dośā hoilo
‘kṛṣṇa-nitya-dāsa mui’ hṛdoye sphurilo

(3) Chanting the Name again and again, what was my condition? Within my heart I realised, “I am an eternal servant of Krishna.”

jānilām māyā-pāśe e jaḍa-jagate
govinda-virahe duḥkha pāi nānā-mate

(4) I realised that I was bound by Māyā’s ropes, in this dull mundane universe, and I simply experience misery in various ways due to separation from Lord Govinda.

āro je saṁsāra mora nāhi lāge bhālo
kā̐hā jāi kṛṣṇa heri e chintā biśālo

(5) And I don’t much like this world of birth and death. Where shall I go to see Krishna? This was my biggest worry.

kā̐dite kā̐dite mora ā̐khi-boriṣoya
barṣā-dhārā heno chakṣe hoilo udoya

(6) I began weeping and weeping; my tears fell. Torrents of rain poured from my eyes just like the rains of the monsoon season.

nimeṣa hoilo mora śata-juga-sam
govinda-viraha āra sohite akṣam

(7) Now, a moment for me is like a hundred ages. I cannot bear this separation from Lord Govinda.

śūnya dharā-tala,    chaudike dekhiye,
parāṇa udāsa hoya
ki kori, ki kori,    sthira nāhi hoya,
jīvana nāhiko roya

(8) The world is empty; as I survey the four directions, the entire surface of the world is void. My life is empty, my mind is listless; I am indifferent and apathetic towards everything. Depressed, melancholy and forlorn, my life has no meaning now. What do I do now? I cannot remain steady. I can no longer maintain my life.

vraja-vāsi-gaṇa    mora prāṇa rākho
dekhāo śrī-rādhā-nāthe
bhakativinoda-    minati māniyā,
laohe tāhāre sāthe

(9) Oh residents of Vṛndāvan; save my life and show me Rādhānāth, the Lord of Śrī Rādhā. Considering this humble prayer of Bhakti Vinod, please give him Your association and take him with You.

śrī kṛṣṇa-viraha āro sohite nā pāri
parāṇa chāḍite āro din dui chāri

(10) I am unable to further tolerate this separation from my Lord Krishna and am ready to give up my life in two days or four.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/gaite-gaite-nama-ki-doshia-hoilo