1. Pita-varaṇa kali
-------------------

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam

(1) The first verse of the Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam is as follows:

cheto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ
bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ
śreyaḥ-kairava-chandrikā-
vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhu-jīvanaṁ
ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ
prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ
sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ
vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

(2) The Holy Name of Krishna cleanses the mirror of the heart and extinguishes the fire of misery in the forest of birth and death. As the evening lotus blooms in the moon’s cooling rays, the heart begins to blossom in the nectar of the Name.
And at last the soul awakens to its real inner treasure — a life of love with Krishna. Again and again tasting nectar, the soul dives and surfaces in the ever-increasing ocean of ecstatic joy.
All phases of the self of which we may conceive are fully satisfied and purified, and at last conquered by the all-auspicious influence of the Holy Name of Krishna.

pīta-varaṇa kali-pāvana gorā
gāoyāi aichana bhāva-bibhorā

(3) Lord Gaurāṅga, whose complexion is golden and who is the deliverer of the fallen souls of Kali-yuga, sings as follows, overwhelmed with spiritual ecstasy.

chitta-darpaṇa-parimārjana-kārī
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya chitta-bihārī

(4) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! It thoroughly cleanses the mirror of the heart and is the delight of the soul.”

helā-bhava-dāva-nirvāpaṇa-vṛtti
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya kleśa-nivṛtti

(5) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! It extinguishes the forest fire of material existence and removes all material tribulations.”

śreyaḥ-kumuda-bidhu-jyotsnā-prakāśa
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya bhakti-vilāsa

(6) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! It appears like the moon in the heart and distributes its cooling moonlight, making the white lotus of the soul’s good fortune blossom and bloom. Krishna-kīrtan is the bhakti-vilāsa, the beautiful pastime of devotion.”

viśuddha-vidyā-vadhu jīvana-rūpa
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya siddha-svarūpa

(7) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! It reveals one’s pure identity in relationship with the Lord even up to divine consorthood. This chanting is the real perfection of life.”

ānanda-payo-nidhi-vardhana-kīrti
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya plābana-mūrti

(8) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! Krishna-kīrtan causes the ocean of ecstatic joy to overflow. It is an inundation of divine love.”

pade pade pījuṣa-svāda-pradātā
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya prema-bidhātā

(9) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! Krishna-kīrtan gives one a taste of fully satisfying nectar at every step; ultimately it bestows ecstatic love of Godhead.”

bhakativinoda-svātma-snapana-vidhān
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya prema-nidān

(10) “All glories to the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna! It bathes the soul of Bhakti Vinod. This chanting is a storehouse of love of Godhead.”


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/pita-varana-kali-pavana-gora