3. Śrī-Kṛṣṇa-kīrtane jodi
-------------------------

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam

(1) The third verse of the Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam is as follows:

tṛṇād api sunīchena
taror iva sahiṣṇunā
amāninā mānadena
kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

(2) One who is humbler than a blade of grass, more forbearing than a tree who gives due honour to others without desiring it for himself is qualified to always chant the Holy Name of Krishna.

śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtane jodi mānasa tohāra
parama jatane tā̐hi lobho adhikāra

(3) If your mind is always carefully absorbed in the chanting of the Holy Name, then you will become qualified for chanting the Holy Name of Krishna.

ṭṛṇādhika hīna, dīna, akiñchana chāra
āpane mānobi sadā chāḍi’ ahaṅkāra

(4) Humbler than a blade of grass considering yourself low, poor, and meek, give up your false ego.

vṛkṣa-sama kṣamā-guṇa karabi sādhana
pratihiṁsā tyaji anye karabi pālana

(5) Tolerant as a tree, you should forgive and forbear, giving up violence. Practice nurturing and protecting others.

jīvana-nirvāhe āne udvega nā dibe
para-upakāre nija-sukha pāsaribe

(6) Live without causing anxiety to others; do good unto others without considering your own happiness.

hoile-o sarva-guṇe guṇī mahāśoya
pratiṣṭhāśā chāḍi kara amānī hṛdoya

(7) A great soul who has all these qualities should not become proud of his saintly qualities, but, giving up position and prestige he should always remain prideless within his heart.

kṛṣṇa-adhiṣṭhān sarva-jīve jāni sadā
karabi sammāna sobe ādare sarvadā

(8) Always knowing that Krishna dwells within the hearts of all living beings, you should always properly respect and honour others.

doinya, dayā, anye mān, pratiṣṭhā-varjan
chāri guṇe guṇī hoi karaho kīrtan

(9) Humility, mercy, consideration of others, and giving up position are the four qualities needed to perform kīrtan.

bhakativinoda kā̐di bole prabhu-pāya
heno adhikāra kobe dibe he āmāya

(10) Bhakti Vinod, crying at the Lord’s holy feet says, “O my Lord, when will You bestow upon me the qualifications for Krishna-kīrtan?”


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/shri-krishna-kirtane-jodi-manasa-tohara