Śrī Sāraswat-ārati
------------------

Śrī Sāraswat-ārati

jayare jayare jaya gaura-sarasvatī
bhakativinoda nvaya karuṇā murati

(1) All glories, all glories, all glories to Śrīla Bhakti Siddhānta Saraswatī Ṭhākur, who is intimately connected with Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur and is an embodiment of Śrī Gaurāṅga’s mercy.

prakāśile gaura-sevā bhūvana maṅgala
bhakatisiddhānta śuddha prajñāna ujjvala

(2) You  manifested  devotional  service  to  Lord Gaurāṅga, which is beneficial to the whole universe. Your pure devotional conclusions are effulgent with Absolute Knowledge.

rādhā-śyāma ekatanu dakṣe gorā rāya
bāme rādha madhye svayaṁ śyāma-gopa jaya

(3) All glories to Śrī Rādhā and Śyāma (Krishna) who are combined in the one body of Śrī Gaurāṅga, who is on the right side; glories to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is on the left side; and glories to Him, who is in the middle and who is none other than the Supreme Cowherd Boy, Śrī Śyāmasundar.

vraja rasa nava bhāve nabadvīpe rāje
udāre madhura rāga abhinava sāje

(4) The mellow of Vraja (Vṛndāvan) is present in Nabadwīp in a new mood; when this sweet loving sentiment is mixed with magnanimity, then it shows itself as uniquely beautiful.

mādhurya kaivalya rāga vrajera nirjāsa
prāpti parākāṣṭhā tāhe gaurāṅga vilāsa

(5) Mādhurya-rasa (conjugal love) is the essence of Vraja Dhām, and the Pastimes of Mahāprabhu take it to its highest perfection.

rādhā bhāva-kānti aṅgikari’ bhālo mate
dakṣiṇe āsana rasa garimā dekhāte

(6) Earnestly accepting Śrī Rādhā’s mood and beauty, He has taken His place on the right to show His glorious position.

rādhā-rasa-troyo-svāda rahasya proyāsa
nirakhi praphulla rādhā mukhe manda hāsa

(7) Seeing Krishna’s mischievous desire to understand the glory of Her love, Krishna’s wonderful sweetness that only She can relish through Her transcendental qualities, and the happiness She feels from Krishna’s sweet love for Her, Rādhārāṇī is very pleased and there is a subdued smile on Her face.

madhye rahi vaṁśīrave ghoṣe vaṁśīdhara
rādhāra sampade āmī gaurāṅga-sundara

(8) In the middle, Vaṁśīdhara (the Flute Player) is playing His flute, thinking that, “Only by the wealth of Rādhārāṇī do I become Gaurāṅga Sundar.”

madabhīṣṭha rūpa rādhāra hṛdoya mandire
gaurāṅga bhajile suṣṭhu sphūrti pāya tāre

(9) “My most cherished form is revealed in the temple of Rādhārāṇī’s heart, and that highest manifestation of Myself can be attained only by worshipping Gaurāṅga.”

nadīyā prakāśe mahāprabhu gaura-nidhi
patita pāvana deve milāila vidhi

(10) By the Lord’s divine arrangement, the Supreme Savior of the fallen souls appeared in Nadīyā as the most beloved Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu.

e-rūpa ārati brahmā śambhu agochara
gaura bhakta kṛpā pātra mātra siddhi sāra

(11) This type of divine worship of Mahāprabhu is beyond the vision of even Lord Brahmā or Lord Shiva. Only by receiving the mercy of a devotee of Lord Gaurāṅga can one attain such perfection.

śrī svarūpa, rāmānanda, rūpa, sanātana
śrī raghu, jīvādi kṛpāya dekhe bhakta-jana

(12) Only by the mercy of Śrī Swarūp Dāmodar, Śrī Rāmananda Rāya, Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātan, Śrī Raghunāth, Śrī Jīva and their associates do the devotees attain that vision.

jaya guru-gaura-rādhā-govinda-sundara
jaya dāo bhakta vṛnda nitya nirantara

(13) All glories to Śrī Guru, Gaurāṅga, Rādhā-Govindasundar. O devotees, always sing Their eternal glories.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/jayare-jayare-jaya-gaura-sarasvati