Śrī Kṛṣṇera Viṁsottara-śata-nāma
--------------------------------

Śrī Kṛṣṇera

nagare nagare gorā gāy

(1) From village to village Lord Gaura sings these names of Śrī Krishna.

jaśomatī-stanya-pāyī śrī-nanda-nandana
indra-nīla-maṇi vraja-janera jīvana

(2) Krishna is the baby who feeds on the breast of Mother Yaśodā. He is the son of Mahārāj Nanda, dark blue like an indra-nīla gem, and the life of the residents of Vraja.

śrī gokula niśācharī-pūtanā ghātana
duṣṭa-tṛṇāvarta-hantā śakaṭa-bhañjana

(3) Krishna destroyed the witch of Gokul, Pūtanā; He broke the cart in which the demon Śakaṭāsura was hiding; and He destroyed the wicked demon, Tṛṇāvarta.

navanīta-chora dadhi-haraṇa-kuśala
jamala-arjuna-bhañjī govinda gopāla

(4) He is an expert thief of butter and yoghurt, He broke the two Jamala Arjuna trees, and He is a cowherd boy who is always giving pleasure to the cows, land and senses.

dāmodara vṛndāvana-go-vatsa-rākhāla
vatsāsurāntaka hari nija-jana-pāla

(5) He is so naughty that His mother bound Him around the waist with ropes. Thus He is known as Dāmodar. He is the keeper of Vṛndāvan’s cows and calves, the destroyer of the demon Vatsāsura, He is the remover of all evils and is the protector of His devotees.

baka-śatru agha-hantā brahma-vimohana
dhenuka-nāśana kṛṣṇa kālīya-damana

(6) Krishna is the enemy of the demon Bakāsura, the slayer of Aghāsura, the bewilderer of Lord Brahmā, the destroyer of Dhenukāsura and the subduer of the Kālīya serpent. He is all-attractive and is the colour of a fresh rain cloud.

pītāmbara śikhi-picha-dhārī veṇu-dhara
bhāṇḍīra-kānana-līla dāvānala-hara

(7) Lord Krishna dresses in yellow silk cloth and wears peacock feathers on His head. He holds a flute, performs Pastimes in the Bhāṇḍīra forest, and He once swallowed a forest fire to save the inhabitants of Vraja.

naṭavara-guhāchara śarata-bihārī
ballabhī-ballabha deva gopī-vastra-hārī

(8) Krishna, best of dancers, sometimes wanders in the caves of Govardhān Hill. He enjoys various amorous Pastimes in the autumn season, He is the lover of the young cowherd maidens, the stealer of their garments, and the Supreme Lord of all.

yajña-patnī-goṇ-prati karuṇāra sindhu
govardhana-dhṛk mādhava vraja-vāsi-bandhu

(9) Krishna is the ocean of mercy of the wives of the sacrificial brāhmaṇs, He is the holder of Govardhān Hill, the husband of the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, and the dearmost friend of the inhabitants of Vraja.

indra-darpa-hārī nanda-rakṣitā mukunda
śrī-gopī-ballabha rāsa-krīḍa pūrṇānanda

(10) He broke Indra’s pride and protected His father, Nanda Mahārāj. He is the giver of liberation, the lover of the cowherd maidens of Vraja, the enjoyer of the Rāsa Dance and the reservoir of pleasure.

śrī-rādhā-vallabha rādhā-mādhava sundara
lalitā-viśākhā-ādi sakhī-prāṇeśvara

(11) He is the lover of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the very springtime of Her life. He is the Lord of the lives of all the gopīkās of Vṛndāvan, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā.

nava-jaladhara-kānti madana-mohana
vana-mālī smera-mukha gopī-prāṇadhana

(12) Krishna possesses the loveliness of a fresh rain cloud in the Autumn sky. He is the bewilderer of Cupid, always garlanded with fresh forest flowers. His face is like a full-blown lotus flower of sweet smiles and laughter. He is the wealth of the lives of all the young maidens in Vraja.

tri-bhaṅgī muralī-dhara jāmuna-nāgara
rādhā-kuṇḍa-raṅga-netā rasera sāgara

(13) He possesses a beautiful three-fold bending form and holds a flute known as Muralī. He is the lover of the Yamunā River, the director of all the amorous love sports at Rādhā Kuṇḍa, and He is the ocean of devotional mellows.

chandrāvalī-prāṇanātha kautukābhilāṣī
rādhā-māna-sulampaṭa milana-prayāsī

(14) Krishna is the Lord of the life of Chandrāvalī, and He is always desirous of joking and sporting. He is very anxious to taste the rasa of his beloved Rādhikā’s feigned sulking and always endeavours for Their meeting.

mānasa-gaṅgāra dānī prasūna-taskara
gopī-saha haṭha-kārī vraja-vaneśvara

(15) He is the giver of the Mānasa Gaṅgā Lake to the inhabitants of Vṛndāvan. This thief of flower blossoms acts very outrageously with the maidens of Vṛndāvan. not caring for social restrictions, for He is the Lord of the Vraja Maṇḍal forests.

gokula-sampada gopa-duḥkha-nibāraṇa
durmada-damana bhakta-santāpa-haraṇa

(16) He is the wealth of Gokul and protects the cowherd men and boys from all miseries. He curbs all foolish pride and removes all distress from His devotees.

sudarśana-mochana śrī-saṅkhachūḍāntaka
rāmānuja śyāma-chā̐da muralī-bādaka

(17) Krishna gives the gopīs side-long glances and is the destroyer of Śaṅkhachūḍa. He is the younger brother of Lord Baladeva, He is the beautiful dark moon of Vṛndāvan and the player of the flute.

gopī-gīta-śrotā madhusūdana murāri
ariṣṭa-ghātaka rādhā-kuṇḍādi-bihārī

(18) He hears the songs of the gopīs and is the slayer of the Madhu demon. This enemy of the demon Mura and killer of Ariṣṭāsura enjoys amorous sports and Pastimes at Rādhā Kuṇḍa and other places in Vraja.

vyomāntaka padma-netra keśī-nisūdana
raṅga-krīḍa kaṁsa-hantā mallu-praharaṇa

(19) Krishna is the destroyer of the demon Vyomāsura. He is lotus-eyed, the killer of the Keśī demon, frolicsome, the slayer of King Kaṁsa and the conquerer of Kaṁsa’s wrestlers, Chāṇūra and Muṣṭika.

vasudeva-suta vṛṣṇi-baṁśa-kīrti-dhvaja
dīnanātha mathureśa devakī-garbha-ja

(20) He is the beloved son of Vasudeva and the emblem of fame for the Vṛṣṇi dynasty. The Lord of the fallen souls, Śrī Krishna, is the Lord of Mathurā and He appears to have taken birth from the womb of Devakī.

kubjā-kṛpāmoya viṣṇu śauri nārāyaṇa
dvārakeśa narakaghna śrī-jadunandana

(21) Krishna is full of mercy for the hunchbacked Kubjā. He is the maintainer of the entire creation, the son of Vasudeva, the refuge of all souls, the Lord of Dvārakā, the slayer of Narakāsura and the beloved descendent of the Jadu dynasty.

śrī-rukmiṇī-kānta satyā-pati sura-pāla
pāṇḍava-bāndhava śiśupālādira kāla

(22) He is the lover of Rukmiṇī, the husband of Satyā, the protector of the godly, the beloved friend and relative of the five Pāṇḍava brothers and the cause of death for Śiśupāla and other demoniac kings.

jagadīśa janārdana keśavārta-trāṇa
sarva-avatāra-bīja viśvera nidāna

(23) Krishna is the Lord of the universe, the maintainer of all living beings and He possesses beautiful hair. He is the deliverer from all misery and the origin of the universe and all incarnations.

māyeśvara yogeśvara brāhma-tejā-dhāra
sarvātmāra ātmā prabhu prakṛtira pāra

(24) He is the Lord of Māyā; the master of mysticism; the proprietor of the spiritual powers of the brāhmanas; the Lord, master and soul of all souls, and He is the opposite shore of the ocean of material nature.

patita-pāvana jagannātha sarveśvara
vṛndāvana-chandra sarva-rasera ākara

(25) Lord Krishna is the purifier of the fallen souls, the Lord of the universe, the Lord of all beings, the moon of Vṛndāvan and the origin of all rasas.

nagare nagare gorā gāy
bhakativinoda tachu pāy

(26) Lord Chaitanya sings these names of Krishna from village to village, and Ṭhākur Bhakti Vinod falls at His lotus feet.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/nagare-nagare-gora-gay