Śrita Kamalā
------------

Śrita Kamalā

śrita-kamalā-kuchha-maṇḍala dhṛta-kuṇḍala he
kalita-lalita-vana-māla jaya jaya deva hare

(1) I Glories, glories to Lord Hari, the Supreme Lord of Godhead, who is bedecked with jeweled earrings and a garland of forest flowers and whose feet are marked with a lotus!

dina-maṇi-maṇḍala-maṇḍana bhava-khaṇḍana he
muni-jana-mānasa-haṁsa jaya jaya deva hare

(2) I The Lord’s face shines like the whorl of the sun. He removes the miseries of His devotees and is the resting place of the minds of the swan-like sages. Glories! Glories to Lord Śrī Hari!

kāliya-viṣa-dhara-gañjana jana-rañjana he
yadukula-nalina-dineśa jaya jaya deva hare

(3) I O Supreme Personality of Godhead who destroyed the demoniac Kāliya serpent! O Lord, You are the beloved of all living entities and the sun in the galaxy of the Yadu dynasty. Glories! Glories to Lord Śrī Hari.

madhu-mura-naraka-vināśana garuḍāsana he
sura-kula-keli-nidāna jaya jaya deva hare

(4) I O Lord, destroyer of the demons Madhu, Mura and Naraka! Seated on Garuḍa, You are the source of joy for the demigods. All glories to Hari!

amala-kamala-dala-lochana bhava-mochana he
tribhuvana-bhuvana-nidhāna jaya jaya deva hare

(5) I O Lord Your eyes are like lotus petals, and You destroy the bondage of the material world. You are the maintainer of the three worlds. Glories to Lord Hari!

janaka-sutā-kṛta-bhūṣaṇa jita-dūṣaṇa he
samara-śamita-daśa-kaṇṭha jaya jaya deva hare

(6) O Lord, as the gem of the sons of Janaka, You were victorious over all the asuras, and You smashed the greatest asura, the ten-headed Ravana. Glories to Lord Hari!

abhinava-jala-dhara-sundara dhṛta-mandara he
śrī-mukha-chandra-chakora jaya jaya deva hare

(7) O Supreme Personality of Godhead who held the Govardhan Hill! Your complexion is like a fresh monsoon cloud, and Śrī Rādhārāṇī is like a chakora bird who is nourished by drinking the light of Your moonlike face. Glories! Glories to Lord Hari.

tava charaṇaṁ praṇatā vayam iti bhāvaya he
kuru kuśalaṁ praṇateṣu jaya jaya deva hare

(8) O Lord, I offer my humble obeisances at Your lotus feet. Please bless me by Your limitless mercy. Glories! Glories to Lord Śrī Hari!

śrī-jayadeva-kaver idaṁ kurute mudam he
maṅgalam ujjvala-gītaṁ jaya jaya deva hare

(9) The poet Śrī Jayadeva offers this song of devotion and shining good fortune to Thee. All glories! All glories to Lord Śrī Hari!


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/shrita-kamala-kuchha-mandala-dhrita