Āmāra jīvana
------------

Āmāra jīvana

āmāra jīvana,    sadā pāpe rata,
nāhiko puṇyera leśa
porere udvega,    diyāchi je koto,
diyāchi jīvere kleśa

(1) My life is always attached to sinful activity and there is not even a small part of goodness in it. I have caused others anxiety and given trouble to other souls.

nija sukha lāgi’,    pāpe nāhi ḍori,
dayā-hīna svārtha-paro
para-sukhe duḥkhī,    sadā mithya-bhāṣī,
para-duḥkha sukha-kara

(2) For the sake of my own happiness I have openly performed sinful activity. Devoid of compassion, I am concerned only with my own selfish interests. Always telling lies, I become miserable to see the happiness of others, while the misery of others brings great happiness to me.

aśeṣa kāmanā,    hṛdi mājhe mora,
krodhī, dambha-parāyana
mada-matta sadā,    viṣoye mohita,
hiṁsā-garva vibhūṣana

(3) There are limitless material desires within the core of my heart. I am full of anger, attached to arrogance, intoxicated by vanity, and always bewildered by enjoying sense objects. Violence and pride are my ornaments.

nidrālasya hata,    sukārje virata,
akārje udyogī āmi
pratiṣṭha lāgiyā,    śāṭhya-ācharaṇa,
lobha-hata sadā kāmī

(4) Ruined by laziness and sleep, I resist all pious deeds, yet am very enthusiastic to perform wicked acts. For the sake of worldly fame and reputation I engage in the practice of deceitfulness. I am always lustful and a victim of my own greed.

e heno durjana,    sajjana-varjita,
aparādhi nirantara
śubha-kārja-śūnya,    sadānartha-manāḥ,
nānā duḥkhe jara jara

(5) A vile, wicked man such as this, rejected by saintly persons, is a constant offender, devoid of auspicious works, always in the mentality of separate interest, and wasted away by various kinds of miseries.

bārdhakye ekhona,    upāya-vihīna,
tā’te dīna akiñchana
bhakativinoda,    prabhura charaṇe,
kore duḥkha nivedana

(6) Now in old age, deprived of all means of relief, thus humbled and destitute, this Bhakti Vinod submits his tale of grief at the feet of the Supreme Lord.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/amara-jivana-sada-pape-rata