Ātma-samarpaṇe
--------------

Ātma-samarpaṇe

ātma-samarpaṇe gelā abhimāna
nāhi karabu̐ nija rakṣā-vidhān

(1) Surrendering my soul unto You has lifted from me the burden of false pride. No longer will I try to provide for my own safety.

tuyā dhana jāni’ tuhu̐ rākhobi, nāth!
pālya godhana jāni kori’ tuyā sāth

(2) I know that You will give protection to Your treasured possessions, Oh Lord. I now understand the mentality of Your treasured cows safely maintained by Your side.

charāobi mādhava! yamunā-tīre
baṁśī bājāoto ḍākobi dhīre

(3) When You lead Your herds to pasture, Oh Mādhava, on the banks of the Yamunā river, You will call to them by softly playing on Your flute.

agha-baka mārato rakṣā-vidhāna
karabi sadā tuhu̐ gokula-kāna!

(4) By slaying great demons such as Aghāsura and Bakāsura You will always provide full protection, Oh Kān of Gokul!

rakṣā karabi tuhu̐ niśchoy jāni
pāna karabu̐ hām jāmuna-pāni

(5) Fearless and confident of Your protection, I will drink the waters of the Yamunā.

kālīya-dokha karabi vināśā
śodhobi nadī-jala, bāḍāobi āśā

(6) The Kālīya serpent’s venom poisoned the Yamunā’s waters, yet that poison will be vanquished. You will purify the Yamunā, and by such heroic deeds enhance our faith.

piyato dāvānala rākhobi moy
‘gopāla’, ‘govinda’ nāma tava hoy

(7) You will surely protect me by swallowing the forest fire. Thus You are called Gopāl (protector of the cows) and Govinda (pleaser of the cows).

sura-pati-durmati-nāśa vichāri’
rākhobe varṣaṇe, giri-vara-dhāri!

(8) In order to curb the malice of Indra, king of the demigods, You will protect me from his torrents of rain, Oh lifter of the mighty Govardhan Hill!

chatur-ānana korabo jabo chori
rakṣā karabi meye, gokula-hari!

(9) When the four-headed Brahmā abducts me along with Your cowherd boyfriends and calves, then also You will surely protect me, Oh Gokul Hari!

bhakativinoda—tuyā gokula-dhan
rākhobi keśava! korato jatan

(10) Bhakti Vinod is now the property of Gokul, Your holy abode. Oh Keśava! Kindly protect him with gentle loving care.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/atma-samarpane-gela-abhimana