Dainya
------

Dainya

bhuliyā tomāre,    saṁsāre āsiyā,
peye nānābidha byathā
tomāra charaṇe    āsiyāchi āmi,
bolibo duḥkhera kathā

(1) O Lord, forgetting you and coming to this material world, I have experienced various pains and sorrows. Now I am approaching your lotus feet to submit my tale of woe.

jananī-joṭhore,    chilāma jokhon,
viṣama vandhana-pāśe
ekabāra prabhu!    dekhā diyā more,
vañchile e dīna dāse

(2) While I was bound up tightly in the unbearable confines of my mother’s womb, O Lord, You once revealed Yourself before me, but briefly, and then abandoned this poor servant of Yours.

tokhona bhāvinu,    janama pāiyā,
koribo bhajana tava
janama hoilo,    poḍi māyājāle
nā hoilo jñāna-laba

(3) At that moment, I promised that having taken birth I would worship you. But after taking birth, I fell into the entangling network of worldly illusion, devoid of even a drop of true knowledge.

ādarera chele.    svajanera kole,
hāsiyā kāṭānu kāla
janaka-jananī-    snehete bhuliyā
saṁsara lāgilo bhālo

(4) As a boy fondled in the lap of relatives, I passed my time smiling and laughing. My parents’ affection helped me to forget You still more, my Lord, and I began to think the material world to be a very nice place.

krame dina dina,    bālaka hoiyā,
khelinu bālaka saha
āro kichu dine,    jñāna upajilo,
pāṭha poḍi aharahaḥ

(5) Day by day I grew and soon began playing with other boys. My powers of understanding emerged and I read and studied my school lessons incessantly.

idyāra gaurave,    bhrami deśe deśe,
dhana upārjana kori’
svajana-pālana,    kori eka mane,
bhulinu tomāre, hari!

(6) Travelling from place to place, proud of my education, I grew wealthy and maintained my family with undivided attention. O Lord Hari, I forgot You!

vārdhakye ekhona,    bhakativinoda,
kā̐diyā kātara ati
nā bhajiyā tore,    dina vṛthā gelo,
ekhon ki ho’be gati!

(7) Now in old age, this Bhakti Vinod very sadly weeps. I failed to worship You, O Lord, and instead passed my life in vain. What will be my fate now?


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/bhuliya-tomare-samsare-asiya