Nivedana 3
----------

Nivedana

gopīnāth,    āmāra upāya nāi
tumi kṛpā kori,    āmāre loile,
saṁsāre udhāra pāi

(1) Oh Gopīnāth, I have no means of success, but if You take me, having bestowed Your mercy upon me, then I will obtain deliverance from this world.

gopīnāth,    poḍechi māyāra phere
dhon, dārā, suta,    ghireche āmāre,
kāmete rekheche jere

(2) Oh Gopīnāth, I have fallen into the perils of material illusion. Wealth, wife, and sons have surrounded me, and lust has wasted me away.

gopīnāth,    mana je pāgala mora
nā māne śāsana,    sadā achetana,
viṣoye royeche bhora

(3) Oh Gopīnāth, my mind is crazy and does not care for any authority. It is always senseless and has remained in the dark pit of worldly affairs.

gopīnāth,    hāra je menechi āmi
oneka jatana,    hoilo biphala,
ekhona bharasā tumi

(4) Oh Gopīnāth, I have accepted my defeat. All of my various endeavours were useless. Now You are the only hope.

gopīnāth,    kemone hoibe gati
prabala indriya,    bośī-bhūta mana,
nā chāḍe viṣoya-rati

(5) Oh Gopīnāth, how shall I make any advancement when my mind has come under the control of the powerful senses and does not abandon its attachment to materialism?

gopīnāth,    hṛdoye bosiyā mora
manake śamiyā,    loho nija pāne,
ghuchibe vipada ghora

(6) Oh Gopīnāth, after sitting down in the core of my heart and subduing my mind, please take me to You. In this way the horrible dangers of this world will disappear.

gopīnāth,    anātha dekhiyā more
tumi hṛṣīkeśa,    hṛṣīka damiyā,
tāro’ he saṁsṛti-ghore

(7) Oh Gopīnāth, You are Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the senses. Seeing me so helpless, please control these senses of mine and deliver me from this dark and perilous worldly existence.

gopīnāth,    golāya legeche phā̐sa
kṛpā-asi dhori,    bandhana chediyā,
vinode karaho dāsa

(8) Oh Gopīnāth, the noose of materialism has become fixed around my neck. Taking up the sword of Your mercy and cutting this bondage, make this Bhakti Vinod Your humble servant.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/gopinath-amara-upaya-nai