Śrī Nāmāṣṭakam 8
----------------

Śrī Nāmāṣṭakam 8

nārada muni,    bājāya vīṇā,
‘rādhikā-ramaṇa’-nāme
nāma amani,    udita hoya,
bhakata-gīta-sāme

(1) When the great soul Nārada Muni plays his stringed vīṇā, the Holy Name of Rādhikā-Ramaṇa descends and immediately appears amidst the kīrtan of the Lord’s devotees.

amiya-dhārā,    bariṣe ghana,
śravana-jugale giyā
bhakata-jana,    saghane nāche,
bhoriyā āpana hiyā

(2) Like a monsoon cloud, the Holy Name showers pure nectar into their ears. All the devotees, due to great ecstasy, enthusiastically dance to their heart’s content.

mādhurī-pūra,    āsabo paśi’,
mātāya jagata-jane
keho vā kā̐de,    keho vā nāche,
keho māte mane mane

(3) All the inhabitants of the universe become maddened upon entering these intoxicating showers of divine sweetness. Some people cry, some dance and others become fully intoxicated within their minds.

pañcha-vadana,    nārade dhori’,
premera saghana rol
kamalāsana,    nāchiyā bole,
‘bolo bolo hari bolo’

(4) The five-faced Lord Shiva embraces Nārada Muni and repeatedly makes loud screams of ecstatic joy, while Lord Brahmā dances very ecstatically and exclaims, “All of you chant ‘Haribol ! Haribol!’”

sahasrānana,    parama-sukhe,
‘hari hari’ boli gāy
nāma-prabhāve,    mātilo viśva,
nāma-rasa sabe pāy

(5) In supreme happiness the thousand-faced Ananta Śeṣa sings and calls out, “Hari! Hari!” By the influence of the transcendental vibration of that Name, the whole universe becomes ecstatically maddened as everyone tastes and relishes the mellows of the holy name.

śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma,    rasane sphuri’,
pūrā’o āmāra āśa
śrī-rūpa-pade,    jāchaye ihā,
bhakativinoda-dāsa

(6) The Holy Name of Śrī Krishna has fulfilled all my desires by thus manifesting on everyone’s tongue. Bhakti Vinod, the humble servant of the Lord, therefore prays at the feet of Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī that the chanting of Harinām may always continue in this way.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/narada-muni-bajaya-vina