Nām-saṅkīrtan
-------------

Nām-saṅkīrtan

hari haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa yādavāya namaḥ
yādavāya mādhavāya keśavāya namaḥ

(1) O Lord Hari, O Lord Krishna, I offer my obeisances to You, who are known as Yādava, Hari, Mādhava, and Keśava.

gopāla govinda rāma śrī madhusūdana
giridhārī gopīnātha madana-mohana

(2) O Gopāla, Govinda, Rāma, Śrī Madhusūdan, Giridhārī, Gopīnāth, Madana-mohan!

śrī-chaitanya nityānanda śrī advaita-chandra
gadādhara śrīvāsādi gaura-bhakta-vṛnda

(3) All glories to Śrī Chaitanya and Nityānanda. All glories to the moonlike Śrī Advaita Āchārya. All glories to Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍit and all the devotees of Śrī Chaitanya headed by Śrīvās Ṭhākur.

jaya rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa raghunātha
śrī-jīva-gopāla-bhaṭṭa dāsa raghunātha

(4) Allgloriesto Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī, Sanātan Goswāmī, Raghunāth Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī, Śrī Jīva Goswāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī, and Raghunāth Dās Goswāmī.

ei choy gosāir kori charaṇa vandana
jāhā hoite bighna-nāś abhīṣṭa pūraṇa

(5) I offer my obeisances to the Six Goswāmīs. By offering them my obeisances all obstacles to devotion are destroyed and all spiritual desires are fulfilled.

ei choy gosāir jā̐ra mu̐i tā̐ra dāsa
tā̐-sabāra pada-reṇu mora pañcha-grāsa

(6) I am a servant of that person who is a servant of these six Goswāmīs. The dust of their holy feet is my five kinds of foodstuffs.

tā̐dera charaṇa sebi bhakta sane vāsa
janame janame mora ei abhilāṣa

(7) This is my desire, that birth after birth I may live with those devotees who serve the lotus feet of these six Goswāmīs.

ei choy gosāi jabe vraje koilā vāsa
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nitya-līlā korilā prakāśa

(8) When these six Goswāmīs lived in Vraja they revealed and explained the eternal Pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna.

ānande bolo hari bhaja vṛndāvana
śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava-pade majāiyā mana

(9) Absorbing your mind in meditation upon the divine feet of the Spiritual Master and the holy Vaiṣṇavas, chant the names of Lord Hari in ecstasy, and worship the transcendental realm of Vṛndāvan.

śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava-pāda-padma kori āśa
(hari) nāma-saṅkīrtana kohe narottama dāsa

(10) Desiring the lotus feet of Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas, Narottam Dās sings the saṅkīrtan of the Holy Name.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/hari-haraye-namah-krishna-yadavaya-namah