Śrī Śrī Girirāj-Govardhan Ārati
-------------------------------

Śrī Śrī Girirāj-

jaya jaya girirājer ārotiko śobhā
śrī-vraja-maṇḍala mājhe jaga mana lobhā

(1) All glories to the beautiful ārati of Śrī Girirāj which is going on in Śrī Vraja Maṇḍal, attracting the minds of all living entities of the universe.

pramoda-madana-līla śrī-rādhā-ramaṇa
yathā nitya-līlā kore loye sakhī-gaṇa

(2) Lord Śrī Rādha-Ramaṇa [Krishna who gives pleasure to his beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī] is eternally playing His joyful Loving Pastimes there in the association of the Sakhīs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

mālatī-mādhavī-kuñja kandare kandare
nigūḍha nikuñja-līla hari manohare

(3) Here deep within the groves of mālatī flowers and mādhavī creepers, the confidential Pastimes of the charming Lord Hari are going on.

śyāma-kuṇḍa rādhā-kuṇḍa kusum sarovara
mānasa gaṅgā dāna-ghāṭī jāra abhyantara

(4) Within this holy place are Śyāma Kuṇḍa, Rādhā Kuṇḍa, Kusum Sarovar, Mānasa Gaṅgā and Dāna-ghāṭī.

śrī-govinda-kuṇḍa līlāsthalī nāhi sīmā
divāniśi-bhakta-vṛnda kore parikramā

(5) With Śrī Govinda Kuṇḍa, these holy places of divine Pastimes are without limit. Day and night the devotees are performing circumambulation in worship.

‘śrīdhar-svāmī-sevāśram’ parama śobhana
yathā nitya-sevā kore sārasvata-gaṇa

(6) Here there is the supremely beautiful Śrīdhar Swāmī Sevāśram where devotees of Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat Maṭh are performing their eternal service.

abhinna śrī kṛṣṇa jñāne bhajibāra tore
mahāprabhu samarpilā raghunātha kore

(7) Śrīman Mahāprabhu gave Śrī Śrī Girirāj Jīu to Śrī Raghunāth Goswāmī so that Śrī Dās Goswāmī could worship His Lordship knowing Him to be non-different from Krishna.

gosvāmī śrī-raghunātha dāsere smariyā
nirantara sevā kore antarmanā hoiyā

(8) The devotees of Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat Maṭh worship Śrī Śrī Girirāj Jīu in a deep mood of devotion in remembrance of Śrī Raghunāth Dās Goswāmī.

jaya giri-govardhana divya-rasāloy
rūpa-sanātana-jīva-raghunāthāśroy

(9) All glories to Śrī Giri Govardhan which is the abode of divine rasa and the shelter of Śrī Rūpa, Sanātan, Jīva and Raghunāth Goswāmīs.

surendra-munīndra-śiva-śuka-mahājana
dekhena ārati-śobhā durllabha-darśana

(10) The beauty of the ārati of Śrī Girirāj Jīu which is rare and precious is being seen by Lord Indra, Nārada Muni, Lord Shiva, Śukadeva Goswāmī and all the great personalities.

sevya o sevaka-rūpe nitya parakāśa
sānande ārati dekhe e adhama dāsa

(11) Śrī Śrī Girirāj Jīu is eternally manifested as both the worshipable Lord and the servitor Lord. This fallen servant sees the ārati of Śrī Girirāj Jīu with great ecstasy.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/jaya-jaya-girirajer-arotiko-shobha