Śrī Govinda Kuṇḍa Gupta-Govardhan Ārati
---------------------------------------

Śrī Govinda Kuṇḍa

jaya jaya girirājer ārati viśāla
śrī gaura-maṇḍala-mājhe bhuvana-maṅgala

(1) All glories, all glories, to the grand ārati of Śrī Girirāj! In the midst of Śrī Gaura Maṇḍal, it is benefitting the entire universe.

koladvīpe śobhe gupta-govardhanarūpa
vyakta hoilā śrī govinda kuṇḍe aparūpa

(2) The hidden Govardhan graces Koladwīp with its beauty. Now it has manifested its exquisite beauty in Śrī Govinda Kuṇḍa.

mālatī-mādhavī-kuñja kandare kandare
nigūḍha-nikuñja-līlā hari-manohare

(3) There are groves of mālatī and mādhavī flowers in its various caves. In these groves, Lord Hari plays His hidden, mysterious, and enchanting Pastimes.

apūrva kuṇḍera śobhā jena sudhābhāṇḍa
surendra-surabhī-sevā-saubhāgya-mārtaṇḍa

(4) The incomparable beauty of the Kuṇḍa is like a reservoir of honey. Even Lord Indra and the divine Surabhī cow are rendering their service under the shining sun of good fortune.

śrī bhakti-rakṣaka deva-gosvāmī śrīdhara
prakāśilā tava sevā dīpta manohara

(5) Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣak Śrīdhar Dev-Goswāmī Mahārāj has manifested the effulgent and enchanting devotional service to You.

śrī chaitanya-sārasvata maṭha suśobhana
yathā nitya sevā kore sārasvata-gaṇa

(6) Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat Maṭh is a beautiful place where devotees of the Maṭh are always rendering their devotional service.

gosvāmī śrī-raghunātha dāsere smariyā
nirantara sevā kore antarmaṇā hoiyā

(7) Remembering Śrī Raghunāth Dās Goswāmī, they are continuously serving in an introspective mood.

jaya gupta-govardhana divya-rasāloy
rūpa-raghunāthānuga-bhaktera āśroy

(8) All glories to the hidden Govardhan, which is a reservoir of transcendental rasa. It is the refuge of the devotees who are following in the footsteps of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Raghunāth.

kuliyā-prakāśa tava achintya-mahimā
divāniśi bhakta-vṛnda kore parikramā

(9) By Your inconceivable glories and magnanimity, You have manifested Kuliyā (where all offences are forgiven). Day and night, the multitudes of devotees are circumambulating this place.

sevya o sevaka-rūpe nitya parakāśa
sānande ārati dekhe e adhama dāsa

(10) You are eternally manifested both as the worshipable Lord and as the servitor Lord. This fallen servant sees Your ārati with great joy.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/jaya-jaya-girirajer-arati-vishiala