Śrī Guru Ārati
--------------

Śrī Guru Ārati

jaya jaya gurudever ārati ujjvala
govardhana-pāda-pīthe bhuvana-maṅgala

(1) All glories to the effulgent arati of Śrī Gurudeva, which is going on at the foot of Govardhan, benefitting the whole world.

śrī bhakti sundara deva prabhu śiromaṇi
gosvāmī govinda jaya ānandera khani

(2) All glories to Śrī Bhakti Sundar Govinda Goswāmī, who is our supreme master and is like a reservoir of joy.

ājānu lambita bhuja divya kalevara
ananta pratibhā bharā divya guṇadhara

(3) His graceful long hands touch his knees and his body is beautiful and transcendental. He is an ocean of infinite genius and transcendental qualities.

gaura-kṛṣṇe jāni tava abhinna svarūpa
saṁsāra tarite ebe śuddha-bhakta-rūpa

(4) We consider your real identity to be non-different from Krishna and Gaurāṅga. But now, to deliver this material world, you have assumed the form of a pure devotee.

rūpānuga-dhārā tumi kara ālokita
prabhākara sama prabhā bhuvana-vidita

(5) You are brightening the line of the followers of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī. Your effulgence, which is comparable to that of the sun, is known throughout the whole world.

śuddha bhakti prachārite tomā sama nāi
akalaṅka indu jena dayāla nitāi

(6) There is no one like you to preach pure devotion. You are the spotless moon, and you are merciful like Lord Nityānanda.

ullasita viśvavāsī labhe prema-dhana
ānande nāchiyā gāhe tava guṇagaṇa

(7) As ecstatic people all over the world are attaining the treasure of love of Krishna, they are dancing and singing your glories.

sthāpilā āśrama bahu jagata mājhāre
pāramahaṁsa-dharma-jñāna śikṣāra prachāre

(8) To teach the essence of the highest knowledge and to preach it to all, you have established many ashrams all over the world.

chintyāchintya veda-jñāne tumi ādhikārī
sakala saṁśaya chettvā susiddhāntadhārī

(9) You have mastery over the knowledge of the Vedas, both conceivable and inconceivable. You are the treasurer of bona fide conclusions, which can destroy all doubt.

tomāra mahimā gāhe goloka maṇḍale
nitya-siddha parikare tava līlāsthale

(10) Your glories are being sung in the spiritual world of Goloka, the realm of your Pastimes, by your servants who are eternally liberated.

patita pāvana tumi dayāra samīra
sarva-kārye sunipuṇa satya-sugambhīra

(11) To deliver the fallen souls, you are like a breeze of mercy. You are expert in all service, and you are established in truth and gravity.

apurva lekhanī dhārā pragāḍha pāṇḍitya
sadā hāsya miṣṭa bhāśī suśila kavitva

(12) Your beautiful and unprecedented writing reflects your deep scholarship. You are always smiling and speaking sweet words, which remind one of your soothing poetry.

sādhu-saṅge sadānandī sarala vinayī
sabhā-madhye vaktā śreṣṭha sarvatra vijayī

(13) You are always straightforward and humble, and you are always joyful in the association of pure devotees. In a spiritual gathering, you are always the best speaker. In every field of life, you always come out victorious.

gauḍīya gagane tumi āchārya-bhāskara
nirantara sevāpriya miṣṭa kaṇṭhasvara

(14) In the sky of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava world, you are a preceptor who is prominent like the sun. You are always fond of service, and your sweet voice inspires others to do service also.

tomāra karuṇā māge trikāla vilāse
gāndharvikā-giridhārī sevā-mātra āśe

(15) Past, present, and future—for all eternity, we beg your mercy. Only by your mercy will one receive devotional service to Śrī Śrī Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī.

kṛpā kara ohe prabhu śri-gaura-prakāśa
ārati karaye sadā e adhama dāsa

(16) O my lord, who is the manifestation of the mercy of Śrī Gaurāṅga, please be merciful to me. This insignificant servant of yours is always praying this way while worshipping you.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/jaya-jaya-gurudever-arati-ujjvala