Śrī Guru Ārati-stuti
--------------------

Śrī Guru Ārati-stuti

jaya ‘guru-mahārāja’ jati-rājeśvara
śrī-bhakti-rakṣaka deva-gosvāmī śrīdhara

(1) All glory to you, ‘Guru Maharaj,’
Of sannyāsī kings, the Emperor:
The glorious Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣak
Dev-Goswami Śrīdhar.

patita-pāvana-līlā vistāri’ bhuvane
nistārilā dīna-hīna āpāmara jane

(2) Extending in this world your
Pastimes as saviour of the fallen,
You delivered all the suffering souls,
including the most forsaken.

tomāra karuṇāghana murati heriyā
preme bhāgyavāna jīva poḍe murachiyā

(3) Beholding your holy form
of concentrated mercy
The fortunate souls fall in a swoon
of divine love’s ecstasy.

sudīrgha supībya deho divya-bhāvāśray
divya-jñāna dīpta-netra divya-jyotirmoy

(4) Your lofty form full of divine emotion
is nectar for our eyes;
With divine knowledge and shining eyes,
your effulgence fills the skies.

suvarṇa-sūraja-kānti aruṇa-vasana
tilaka, tulasī-mālā, chandana-bhūṣaṇa

(5) A golden Sun resplendent,
in robes of saffron dressed;
Adorned with tilak, Tulasī beads,
and with sandal fragrance blessed.

apūrva śrī-aṅga-śobhā kore jhalamala
audārya-unnata-bhāva mādhurya-ujjvala

(6) The matchless beauty of your holy form,
dazzling in its brightness;
Your benevolence of most noble heart,
in the moonglow of love’s sweetness.

achintya-pratibhā, snigdha, gambhīra, udāra
jaḍa-jñāna-giri-vajra divya-dīkṣādhāra

(7) Inconceivable genius, affection,
gravity, magnanimity —
A thunderbolt crushing mundane knowledge,
the reservoir bestowing divinity.

gaura-saṅkīrtana-rāsa-rasera āśray
“dayāla nitāi” nāme nitya premamoy

(8) In the Golden Lord’s Saṅkīrtan Dance,
you revel ecstatically;
“Dayāl Nitāi, Dayāl Nitāi!”
you ever call so lovingly.

sāṅgopāṅge gaura-dhāme nitya-parakāśa
gupta-govardhane divya-līlāra-vilāsa

(9) Eternally present in Nabadwīp Dhām
with your associates, by your sweet will,
You enjoy your holy Pastimes
on hidden Govardhan Hill.

gauḍīya-āchārya-goṣṭhī-gaurava-bhājana
gauḍīya-siddhāntamaṇi kaṇṭha-vibhuṣaṇa

(10) You’re the fit recipient of your dignity
In the Gauḍīya Āchārya assembly,
The jewel of the Gauḍīya-siddhānta
adorning your chest so nobly.

gaura-sarasvatī-sphūrta siddhāntera khani
āviṣkṛta gāyatrīra artha-chintāmaṇi

(11) You’re the living message of Śrī Gaura,
you’re the mine of perfect conclusions;
You revealed the Gāyatrī’s inner purport:
the gem fulfilling all aspirations.

eka-tattva varṇanete nitya-nava-bhāva
susaṅgati, sāmañjasya, e saba prabhāva

(12) When you speak, one subject alone
is revealed in ever-new light;
Proper adjustment, and harmony —
All these are your spiritual might.

tomāra satīrtha-varga sabe eka-mate
rūpa-sarasvatī-dhārā dekhena tomāte

(13) All your dear Godbrothers
declare unanimously
They see within your Holiness
the line of Rūpa-Saraswatī.

tulasī-mālikā-haste śrī-nāma-grahaṇa
dekhi’ sakalera hoy ‘prabhu’ uddīpana

(14) Seeing you take the Holy Name,
with Tulasī beads in hand,
Awakens the thought of Saraswatī Ṭhākur
in everybody’s mind.

koṭī-chandra-suśītala o pada bharasā
gāndharvā-govinda-līlāmṛta-lābha-āśā

(15) Your feet, cooling like ten million moons —
In their service all faith do I place;
The nectar of Rādhā-Govinda’s Pastimes
one day we may drink, by your grace.

avichintya-bhedābheda-siddhānta-prakāśa
sānande ārati stuti kore dīna-dāsa

(16) O personification of perfect conclusions
inconceivably one, yet different!
I sing this prayer at your ārati,
with joy — your humble servant.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/jaya-guru-maharaja-jati-rajeshvara