Śrī Śrī Nitāi-Chaitanya-Ārati
-----------------------------

Śrī Śrī Nitāi-Chaitanya-Ārati

jaya guru mahārāja karuṇā-sāgara
śrī bhakti rakṣaka deva-gosvāmī śrīdhara

(1) All glories to Śrīla Guru Mahārāj, Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣak Śrīdhar Dev-Goswāmī Mahārāj who is like an ocean of mercy.

prakāśile nīlāchale bhuvana-maṅgala
nitāi-chaitanya-deva-sevā samujjvala

(2) By his mercy, Śrī Śrī Nitāi-Chaitanyadeva have manifested in Puri Dhām bestowing auspiciousness upon the whole world and revealing their effulgent devotional service.

gorāpreme mātoyārā nityānanda-rūpa
rasarāja mahābhāva chaitanya-svarūpa

(3) Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s form is dancing ecstatically intoxicated with divine love for Śrī Gaura, whose manifestation is Rasarāj Śrī Krishna taking the heart and halo of Mahābhāva, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

kasita-kāñchana jini śrī-aṅga labaṇi
du̐hu̐gale vanamālā bhāvera dolanī

(4) Both Lords are standing fully effulgent, glowing just like freshly cut gold, as garlands of various beautiful forest flowers play on their necks.

murachita koṭikāma rūparāsaraṅge
madhura nartana-bhāva varābhaya bhaṅge

(5) Millions and millions of Cupids fall unconscious before the divine feet of Their Lordships, seeing their beauty as their divine forms playfully sway to and fro. They are dancing, touching the hearts of everyone and freely bestowing mercy upon the conditioned souls.

koṭi-chandra-bhānuśobhā ratna-siṁhāsane
prema netre dekhe mahā-bhāgyavāna jane

(6) Brilliant like millions of moons They stand effulgent upon Their jewelled throne. The fortunate souls, their devotional eyes full of love and affection can see Their divine forms.

mṛdaṅga mandirā bāje suśaṅkha-dhvanita
śruti-mauli-ratnamālā-dīpa nirājita

(7) In the temple during the ārati, the mṛdaṅgas resound sweetly as conchshells are blown and the ghee lamp is offered. The different parts of the Vedas within bhakti yoga have taken form in each light as a bhakti yoga light and through this form they are worshipping Their Lordships in the ārati.

bhuvana-mohana du̐hu̐ rūpera ārati
gupta-vṛndāraṇya-vāsī dekhe niravadhi

(8) This type of ārati is only seen by the residents of Nabadwīp Dhām and the dear associates of Śrī Chaitanya. Anyone who sees it will be extremely charmed by it.

śrī svarūpa rāmānanda rūpa-sanātana
raghunātha haridāsa gadādhara dhana

(9) Śrī Chaitanya’s dear associates, Śrī Swarūp Dāmodar, Rāmānanda Rāya, Rūpa Goswāmī, Sanātan Goswāmī, Raghunāth Dās Goswāmī, Haridās Ṭhākur and Gadādhara Paṇḍit are seeing and performing this ārati.

sārvabhauma gopīnātha jīvānuga-jana
dekhena ārati-śobha durllabha-darśana

(10) Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭāchārya, Gopīnāth Āchārya and the followers in the sampradāya of Jīva Goswāmī are all seeing that ārati which is unable to be seen by others.

nadīyā prakāśe nityānanda-gauranidhi
patita-pāvana-kṣetre milāila vidhi

(11) Śrī Nityānanda and Śrī Gaura Mahāprabhu have manifested eternally in Nabadwīp Dhām, Nadia. But now Their divine forms have manifested in Puri Dhām, mercifully given by our fortune-maker, Śrī Gurudeva.

avichintya nityānanda-chaitanya-prakāśa
śrī guru-prasāde dekhe ei adhama dāsa
(śrī guru-prasāde dekhe śrī govinda dāsa)

(12) Inconceivably Śrī Śrī Nitāi-Chaitanya have manifested and through the mercy of Śrī Gurudeva this fallen soul sees Their ārati and joins within the saṅkīrtan.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/jaya-guru-maharaja-karuna-sagara