Prabhāti Gīti
-------------

Prabhāti Gīti

kali-kukkura-kadana jadi chāo he
kaliyuga-pāvana    kali-bhaya-nāśana,
śrī śachī-nandana gāo he

(1) Oh mind, you are like a miserable dog of Kali-yuga! If you want deliverance, then sing the Holy Name of the son of Śachī, for He is the saviour and destroyer of fear in this dark age of Kali.

gadādhara-mādana    nitāi-era prāṇadhana,
advaitera prapūjita gorā
nimai viśvambhara    śrīnivāsa-īśvara,
bhakata samūha-chitachorā

(2) He is the transcendental cupid of Gadādhara, the life and soul of Nityānanda Prabhu, and the worshipable Lord of Śrī Advaita Āchārya. He is known as Nimai as He was born under a Neem tree; Viśvambhara as He is the sustainer of the universe; He is the master of Śrīvās Ṭhākur, and He steals the hearts of all of the devotees.

nadīyā-śaśadhara    māyāpura-īśvara,
nāma-prabartana-śūra
gṛhījana-śikṣaka    nyāsikula-nāyaka,
mādhava-rādhābhāva pūra

(3) He is the moon of Nadia, the Lord of Māyāpur, and heroic saviour who inaugurated the chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna. He is the teacher of all householders and the commander-in-chief of all sannyāsīs. Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu is Krishna, filled with the ecstatic heart’s sentiment of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

sārvabhauma-śodhana    gajapati-tāraṇa,
rāmānanda-poṣaṇa-vīra
rūpānanda-vardhana    sanātana pālana,
haridāsa-modana-dhīra

(4) He purified Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭāchārya and rescued Pratāparudra Maharaj, the great king of Orissa. He is the hero and protector of Rāmānanda Rāy. He increases the ecstasy of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī and He is the guardian of Śrīla Sanātan Goswāmī. He delights the sober Haridās Ṭhākur.

vraja rasa-bhāvana duṣṭamata-śātana,
kapaṭī-vighātana-kāma
śuddha bhakta-pālana śuṣka jñāna-tāḍana,
cholo bhakti-dūṣaṇa-rāma

(5) Śrī Krishna Chaitanya is absorbed in the mellows of Vṛndāvan. He removes the filthy thoughts of the mind, destroying lust and deceit. He drives away dry empiric knowledge which obscures the beauty of pure devotion. He is the protector, maintainer and constant guardian of His pure devotees.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/kali-kukkura-kadana-jadi-chao-he