Aruṇodoya-kīrtan 1
------------------

Aruṇodoya-kīrtan

udilo aruṇa pūraba-bhāge,
dvija-maṇi gorā amani jāge,
bhakata-samūha loiyā sāthe,
gelā nagara-brāje

(1) Just before sunrise, as the eastern sky turned crimson, the jewel of the twice-born, Śrī Gaurahari, awoke. Taking His devotees with Him He began the kīrtan, wandering through the countryside towns and villages.

‘tāthai tāthai’ bājalo khol,
ghana ghana tāhe jhāṅjera rol,
preme ḍhala ḍhala sonāra aṅga,
charaṇe nūpura bāje

(2) The mṛdaṅgas went “tāthai tāthai” to the rhyming chiming of the cymbals, as Mahāprabhu’s golden form shivered in ecstasy and His footbells jingled.

mukunda mādhava jādava hari,
bolore bolore vadana bhori’,
miche nida-vaśe gelo re rāti,
divasa śorīra sāje

(3) Mahāprabhu would call out to the still sleeping people, “Don’t waste your nights uselessly sleeping and your days decorating your bodies! Cry out the Names Mukunda, Mādhava, Jādava and Hari!”

emona durllabha mānava-deho,
pāiyā ki kara bhāva nā keho,
ebe nā bhajile yaśodā-suta,
charame poḍibe lāje

(4) “You have attained this rare human form of life. What are you doing? Don’t you care for this gift? If you don’t worship the darling of Mother Yaśodā now, then great sorrow awaits you at the time of death.”

udita tapana hoile asta,
dina gelo-boli’ hoibe vyasta,
tobe keno ebe alasa hoy,
nā bhaja hṛdoya-rāje

(5) “With every rising and setting of the sun, a day passes and is lost. Why then do you remain idle, refusing to serve the Lord of the heart?”

jīvana anitya jānaha sār,
tāhe nānā-vidha vipada-bhār,
nāmāśroya kori’ jatane tumi,
thākaha āpana kāje

(6) “Know for certain that this life is full of various miseries. Take shelter of the Holy Name as your only business.”

kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā koriyā pān
juḍāo bhakativinoda-prāṇ,
nāma vinā kichu nāhiko āro,
chaudda-bhuvana-mājhe

(7) Drink the pure nectar of the Holy Name of Krishna, and thus satisfy the soul of Ṭhākur Bhakti Vinod. There is nothing but the Name to be had in all the fourteen worlds.

jīvera kalyāṇa-sādhana-kām,
jagate āsi’ e madhura nām,
avidyā-timira-tapana-rūpe,
hṛd-gagane birāje

(8) To penetrate the darkness of ignorance and bless all souls within this universe, the beautiful Name of Krishna has arisen like the shining sun.


Original: https://krishnasearch.com/#/kirtan/udilo-aruna-puraba-bhage