AMI rights reserved by
the President-acharya,
,
Nabadwip and internationally,
Fit edition 5000 copies
15th May, 1992
Printed by Singapore National Pnters
‘foray, Fras 3008, ORE
‘Traalated by Trudi Bhiksu Sri Bhakti Ananda Sagar
Published by Edeevis Kind6, Budapest, Hungary, or
Kolerganj, BO. Nabadwip, Dist. Nadia,
‘West Bengal, Pin 741302, India.
Rater wate |
sisted
SrereRes-egata seas aa Te GIR
aR Fila ofr erat tate a AR cor wT APIA
serene bre cath eer | awwreRetiote Hf Srey otter
A thant ge Rea eer atte | M-Sat -CHR-SE-PE-AT I
‘Barges tra anf anor gat-RT 1 ConA SHC TITAS I
aa ree 2g BraTG Se | Fa aRHTR TTS BFE AA It
All Glory to Sri Krsna Chaitanya
the Golden Moon of Sri Mayapur
For the Reader’s Appreciation
In the Madhya-Lila, ninth chapter of Sri Chaitanya-
Charitamrta, we find:
“That day, the Lord went to the bank of the Payasvint
river. After bathing He went to the Adi-Kesava Temple
where He met with the great devotees there, and it was
there that He obtained the ancient manuscript of the fifth
chapter of Sri Brahma-sarhhita. This gave the Lord
unlimited joy, and Divine Ecstatic Symptoms appeared in
His Body—trembling, weeping, perspiring; He was
stunned, thrilled with Ecstasy.
“As a Scripture embodying Perfect Truths (siddhanta),
‘Sri Brahma-sarthita has no equal; it is the best of all Holy
Books proclaiming the Glories of the Supreme Lord
Govinda. Endless Perfect Truths are expressed in few
i>)
ii ‘ST—For the reader's appreciation @
ETE RAR Hat Coretta | eTE-reRTTS Giant eae Rae
erat Rey Co a TG AE | eH Raa aft, ah wal
afb mica CG ete PN ZH, LA Re HTT RE FETT
Sa | UR HE AH, eS GMT APR, BEATE
Aabratetge Sera after ) Ral ah Ra ze, wea ae fe ET
re fee cot Sheena ate con Prarwarg oer Craaerace
SA ACT AL Tew a CoTCHE FRcabat aR, ae aeneROoE
‘Seatcasy pera |
—Seeio
words, It is the essence of all Vaisnava Scriptures.
“The Lord had that manuscript copied very carefully.
Then He joyfully went to visit the ‘Temple of Ananta-
Padmanabha.”
What more can I say than this? At least I may say that
if this Scripture is reckoned as one of the most ancient
Scriptures, then it is an unprecedented and truly authori-
tative source of the Teachings of Krsna-Bhakti, Devotion
for the Supreme Lord, Krsqa. Again, if itis suggested that
this Scripture was not originally found in this province (Ben-
gal), so it was actually authored by Sri Sri Mahdprabhu,
what could be more happy for us? By obtaining any work
of siddhdnta written by Sri Mahaprabhu, no trace of doubt
‘can ever remain in the world of Vaisnava thought. However
‘one may consider it, this Holy Book, Sri Brahma-sarhhita,
is worshippable to every devotee.
—Sri Bhaktivinoda