All Glories to ßrÈ ßrÈ Guru and GaurÅ⁄ga
Heart
and
Halo
by
His Divine Grace
SwÅmÈ B.R. ßrÈdhar
© Copyright 1997 by
All rights reserved by the
SevÅte-President-åchÅrya
, Nabadwip
Compiled by
SwÅmÈ B. S. TridaˆÎÈ
Edited by
ßrÈpad B. P . JanÅrdan MahÅrÅj
Published by
Ananta Printing & Publishing
under the Divine Guidance of
O˜ Vi›ˆupÅd A›tottara-Íata-ÍrÈ-
ßrimad Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-GoswÅmÈ MahÅrÅj
for
Kolerganj, P .O. Nabadwip, Dist. Nadia
West Bengal, Pin 741302, India
Ananta Printing & Publishing
2827 S. Rodeo Gulch Rd. #3
Soquel, California 95073   U.S.A.
(408) 464-9045
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Part One
THE SOUL AND THE SUPREME SHELTER
The Key is in Your Own Hand  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
Journey to the Center  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
The Real Judgment of Love  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37
Part Two
THE WAY HOME
Delusion, Divinity and the Real Devotee  . . . . . .53
Transcendental Knowledge  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .67
The Sweetest Struggle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73
Heart and Halo  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89
His Divine Grace
ßrÈla Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-GoswÅmÈ MahÅrÅj
His Divine Grace
ßrÈla Bhakti Rak›ak ßrÈdhar Dev-GoswÅmÈ MahÅrÅj
ßrÈ Chaitanya SÅraswat MaÊh
ßrÈ DhÅm NabadwÈp
ßrÈ ßrÈ Guru-GaurÅ⁄ga-GÅndharvÅ-GovindasundarjÈu
NabadwÈp ßrÈ Chaitanya SÅraswat MaÊh
Foreward
It is a privilege and a great fortune once again to
be able to present more nectarean words fromthe lips of His Divine Grace Oì Vi£òupåda
Paramahaìsa Srila Srila Bhakti Rak£ak Sriladhar Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj to the English-speaking public. Itis hoped that these words will find their way into thehearts of all good souls, as well as enliven the prac-titioners on the path of bhakti. Some people like to
read a book out of curiosity, others with keen interestbut a critical eye, whilst others again intend to profitby the fruit of their study, and it is this class wemainly appeal to in the present work. The successfulreception worldwide of our previous publicationThe Golden Staircase has encouraged us in this
attempt. Srila Guru Mahåråj writes in his Srila Srila
Prapanna-j^vanåmùtam (1.8):
yyaakktthhookkttåå rr¨¨ppaa--ppååddeennaa,, nn^^cceennoottppååddiittee ’’nnaallee
hheemmnnaaèè ßßuuddddhhiiss ttaatthhaaiivvååttrraa,, vviirraahhåårrttttii--hhùùttiièè ssaattååmm
“As Srila R¨pa Goswåm^påd has in his humility
expressed that gold can be purified with fire lit by abarbarian, similarly the pure devotee’s grief born
9
of separation from the Lord may also be dispelled by
this book.”
The words of Srila Sriladhar Mahåråj are already
living in the hearts and homes of many, many peoplein the world today, in the form of books, and audioand video cassettes. The sweet vibration of hisk^rtana in the form of Hari-kathå continues to
expand to the limits of the universe. Srila SriladharMahåråj was once described as a “man of eternalmind”—such was the feeling of those persons fortu-nate enough to hear him speak about the spiritualworld. The preciseness of his representation ofsiddhånta (devotional conclusions), the clarity of
his theological and ontological analysis , the startlingeffectiveness and simplicity of his analogies, alongwith the extraordinary combination of gravity and, attimes, child-like simplicity, marked him as trulyunique. One felt he was the most genuine personone could ever meet. His own Guru- Mahåråj SrilaBhaktisiddhånta Saraswat^ ëhakura referred to himas  “a man of substance.” Small wonder then thatdevotees from far and wide would seek him out forhis reliable and final judgment on any matter ofimportance. Even many of those who were placed in‘opposition’ to him eventually could not help but
10HEART AND HALO
be charmed. When he himself once inquired from
one such gentleman as to why, even while main-taining this frame of mind, he still continued to visithim regularly, the man replied: “Because of yourdeep intelligence, sound common sense and disin-terested nature.”
The present selection is from informal talks
recorded at the Srila Chaitanya Såraswat Math between1982–85. The title of the book
Heart and Halo is
Srila Sriladhar Mahåråj’s own sweet expression todescribe the bhåva and kånti of Srilamat^ Rådhåråò^,
the supreme predominated moiety, consort of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Srila Krishna. Oncewhen His Divine Grace was searching for a fittingexpression to describe Her inner and outer quali-ties, the devotees attending his talk at the timeattempted to provide suitable expressions: “moodand luster,” “feeling and effulgence,” and severalother such versions were put forward, but each timeSrila Sriladhar Mahåråj shook his head, unsatisfied.Suddenly, with a smile lighting up his countenance,he looked up and said sweetly: “Heart and Halo.”
Especially we offer our daòàavat pranams to
His Divine Grace Srila Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj, the beloved successor of Srila
11FOREWARD
Bhakti Rak£ak Sriladhar Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj and
present President-Ächårya of Srila Chaitanya SåraswatMath, worldwide. Under his shelter, affection andinspiration, a new generation of devotees are blos-soming. May this generation go forth into the worldcarrying the eternal message of Srila Sriladhar Mahåråjto all corners.
We would like to personally express our gratitude
to all those who have helped this work through itsvarious stages to completion, especially: Srilapad B. A.Sagar Mahåråj, Srilapad B. P. Janårdan Mahåråj, SrilapadB.C. Pårvat Mahåråj, Srila çrutaßrava Prabhu, SrilaSårvabhåvana Prabhu, Srila Navadw^p Prabhu, Srila Jagad-bandhu Prabhu, Srila Aditi-nandan Prabhu, Srila LalitåCharaòa Prabhu, Srila Narahari Prabhu, Srilamat^Swarnangi dev^ dås^, Srilamat^ Anupamå dev^ dås^,Srilamat^ S^tå dev^ dås^, Srilamat^ Tilaka dev^ dås^ andSrilamat^ Dik£åvat^ dev^ dås^.
We apologize if any mistakes of any kind remain
in this work despite every effort to eradicate them.
Hare Krishna
Swåm^ B. S. Tridaòà^ Saphala Ekadåß^December 18, 1995HEART AND HALO
12
PART ONE
The Soul
And The
Supreme Shelter
HEART AND HALO
14
The Key
Is In
Your Own Hand
There is consciousness of the higher, the
subjective world, and consciousness of thelower, objective world. Connection with the
lower objective world binds us with misery, andrelationship with the superior consciousness lifts usup, gives us real fortune. One result is from dedica-tion, and another is from enjoyment. In a word:enjoyment is bad, and devotion is good. On the sideof devotion is the Lord, and on that of enjoyment,misery. “There are so many things to be enjoyed”:this is fascination with hell, with reaction.
bhaktis tvayi sthiratarå bhagavan yadi syåd
daivena naè phalati divya-kißora-m¨rtièmuktiè svayaì mukulitåñjali sevate ’småndharmårtha-kåma-gatayaè samaya-prat^k£åè
(Kù£òa-karòåmùta 107)
15
In his Krishna-karòåmùta, Bilvamangala Thåkura
says: “ bhaktis tvayi sthiratarå bhagavan yadi syåt ,
My Lord, if my dedication, my veneration to You ispermanent, is in a settled stage, daivena naè phalati
divya-kißora-m¨rtiè , and if it reaches to such a height
that we can find divya-kißora-m¨rttiè , a young pair
engaged in that highest pastime—if we can reach sofar, to find out the eternal pastimes of the DivineCouple, if we can reach to this extent—then we willfind, muktiè svayaì mukulitåñjali sevate ’smån, oh,
the facility of liberation, emancipation, with foldedpalms will come to serve us in any way we like.And, dharmmårtha-kåma-gatayaè sråmaya-
prat^k£åè : dharma, the results of dutifulness; artha,
moneymaking; and kåma, the objects of sense percep-
tion—they are all ready and waiting outside, andwhenever a call comes they will come in front ofus, ‘What do you want, my master, my lord?’ Thatwill be our position: dharma, artha and kåma will
wait outside, and whenever we call them they willpresent themselves: ‘What do you want me to do?’And mukti, liberation, will be always moving around
us with folded palms doing service of different types,if in our fortune we can rise up to such a height as tofind that Divine Couple engaged in happy pastimes.”HEART AND HALO
16
Bilvamaògala Thåkura showed in his life a pecu-
liar example: how from the house of the prostitute hewent straight to Vùndåvan and got the grace of theSupreme Entity; how in his life he was so muchengrossed in, almost swallowed by, sensualism of thelowest type; and from that position, in a single life hecould raise himself to the highest stage of realizationof the Beautiful.
Mahåprabhu took two books from South India;
one was Brahma-saìhitå , and the other was
Krishna-karnåmùta . Krishna-karnåmùta is about the
pastimes of Vùndåvan, and Brahma-saìhitå shows
the ontological basis of the Absolute, how the Lordof Vùndåvan is the highest conception of Reality.
Krishna-l^lå is not a matter of history. In history
events occur, they happen once and can’t reoccurat any time. It is an eternal flow in which what isgoing on in the past never comes again. There is anexpression “history repeats itself,” but that is in thesimilar nature of the event, not the actual fact; historyrepeats its nature, but what is gone, is gone. Once ithas gone, it has gone forever. But in Krishna-l^lå , in
the eternal world, it is not so. It may present thesame thing every time, at every second; thus it iscalled nitya-l^lå , ‘eternal pastimes’—crossing theTHEKEY IS IN YOUR OWNHAND
17
limitation, the jurisdiction of history. In history,
what is past is dead. But the pastimes of the Lord areeternal, nitya , always present. Every l^låis eternally
present; He can show Himself in His eternal formssimultaneously. So in His past, present and future, allevents are simultaneously occurring. When He entersthe arena of Kaìsa, different groups are seeing Himin different ways. What is seen by one section ofpeople is seen differently by another, according totheir own nature. Even the blind can see Him if Hewills. If He wills to show Himself to anyone, thoughblind one can see Him clearly, because these eyes offlesh are not necessary to see Him. By His willpoweralone He can reveal Himself to any person. Thatwas the case with Dhùtarå£éra in the Kuru-ßabha .
Dhùtarå£éra said, “For the time being, my Lord,restore my eyesight so that I can see Your wonderfulform which the others are seeing and praising. Youcan do anything, so only for the time being removemy blindness.”
“It is not necessary to remove your blindness,
Dhùtarå£éra! I say ‘You see Me’ and you will seeMe.” And by His order, Dhùtarå£éra saw! His order,His wish is everything. His simple will is every-thing, the cause of all existence.
18HEART AND HALO
The Kurus wanted to see Draupad^ naked, but
Draupad^’s appeal reached Him and He sanctionedcloth, and that cloth became infinite, of infinite char-acter. As much cloth as they removed, so much clothremained. It is the will, the vicåra , which is every-
thing. Such great potency of such high quality is in thePrime Cause. We are accustomed to think: “This isgood, this is bad,” and “this is possible, this is impos-sible.” We are accustomed to such considerationswithin our rules of thought. But these rules do notapply in His case. All of our experience will fail tooccupy even a very negligible part of His Kingdom.
He is wonderful. In the example of Vamanåvatåra
it is told of His ‘wonderful stride,’ adbutkrama . With
one stride He covered the whole earth, and with thenext He captured the whole of heaven. He then neededa place to put His third step, but where? He isadbutkråma , He of wonderful stride; all His steps are
wonderful. He is wonder, the source of all wonder toour tiny brain. He is here, He is also everywhere. WithHis full representation He is everywhere; yet He isnowhere! Everything is in Him, and nothing is in Him!Krishna said, “Try to understand My peculiar posi-tion, Arjuna.” He is the Mystery of all mysteries. Evenour own soul is astonishing to our worldly experience:
19THEKEY IS IN YOUR OWNHAND
åßcaryavat paßyati kaßcid enam
åßcaryavad vadati tathaiva cånyaèåßcaryavac cainam anyaè ßùòotißrutvåpy enaì veda na caiva kaßcit
(Bhagavad-g^tå 2.29)
We do not even know the extraordinary nature of
our own self. It is of a very high order, but our atten-tion is focused towards so many mortal things; wehave been introduced to, and captured by, themeanest aspect of the world. This is the consequenceof the mood of enjoyment. We want to enjoy, wewant to exploit. A good exploiter is a king to us!But exploitation in itself is degrading, very meanand low. It takes us to the lowest position and makesus victims of a great reaction.
Exploitation and enjoyment: we are in the midst of
them and do not know anything but enjoyment. Wewant to understand anything and everything in termsof enjoyment; we are in such a filthy, degraded posi-tion. Only, ‘enjoyment, enjoyment’—that is exploita-tion. But to exploit is the meanest type of nature, it ishateful, and we must get out of the clutches of thatghost of exploitation. And there is another ghost:renunciation, idleness. But the noble thing is dedi-cation, a dedicated life. HEART AND HALO
20
There are two ghosts, one of renunciation and the
other of exploitation, and we have to get out of thatnightmare, that mania, which is based on ourtendency of measuring things to be good and bad. Inexploitation there is division into regular and irreg-ular, or dharma and adharma .
And then renunciation. So many great stalwarts of
that conception recommend a complete cessation ofthe dynamic life. A dead stop! But that should not bethe prospect of any conscious man. A dead stop tolife: is that any goal of life for the saner section?
A life of nobility, a life of dedication—and not
only ordinary dedication for the environment, butdedication for the highest good—is the highest formof life. In the lower stage that dedication is calcula-tive; in the higher stage, spontaneous, automatic.And really, there is joy. Joy is there in quality andquantity; in every way, real life is there. Life is there,and here is the worst shadow, the perverted reflection.And we are told, uddhared åtmanåtmånam, the key
is in our own hand, the freedom by which we canassociate with anything, good or bad, and reap theresult accordingly.
Ultimately, we are told that the key is in our own
hand; none else is to be blamed for our presentTHEKEY IS IN YOUR OWNHAND
21
condition. But there is always the possibility of noble
help being extended to us, and we must accept that.Our past actions also influence us a great deal—whether they were good, bad, or of the eternal aspi-ration, sukùti . But ultimately the possibility of free
action is not taken away from us at any stage; evenif we are reduced to the level of taking birth as atree, there also, the freedom is within. It is hard tothink that a tree has got independence, free will, butit is there, in a suppressed position. Freedom iswithin us also, and we may try as far as possible tounderstand how it is so, but our freedom is alsocovered by so many conditions that we may think weare not free but are forced by circumstances. Butstill, we are free for our selection of any path, goodor bad. Our existence is very small and so ourfreedom is also small  and meager, but it is there.Though almost negligible, it exists. HEART AND HALO
22
Journey
to the Center
Generally, if all our activity is stopped by un-
favorable weather, we think “This is verybad!” We are men of action, men who exploit
the environment and nature for gathering someenergy. We are always trying to collect some energyfor our use. That is our nature. The very nature ofthose who live in this mortal world is to collect moreand more energy and wealth that can be utilized in atime of need. If there is any hindrance to that end wethink it is a very bad circumstance, in opposition tothe object of our life. But to remind us about theimportance of our inner wealth, we are advised thatthe outer nature cannot do us so much harm as canour internal nature, that is, our apathy to collectmore wealth for the inner existence, the inner self. Bemindful of that!
Losing things of this mortal world is not bad; it is
all coming and going. The body itself, the center ofall this activity, will also vanish. Then what is thenecessity of collecting so much energy for the bodily
23
connection? So, awaken your soul, the real person
within; search him out and try to help him. That ispossible only with help from the sadhu .
The day in which we do not find any saint, or
have any discussion about the real purpose of  life,the inner life, the inner substance, that day we arethe loser. Be conscious of that. In all respects, inany way possible, mind your own lesson, mindyour own interest, find your own self. Beunmindful towards the external world and circum-stances and dive deep into the reality, the innerworld. Find your inner self and the inner worldwhere you live, where your inner self is living.Try to find your Home, to go back to God, back toHome. Your energy must be utilized for goingHome, and not for wandering in the other land,the land of death. Try to avoid the land of death atany cost; always try to find the eternal soil, that soilto which you belong. Try to understand what isyour Home and why it is your Home. Homecomfort: what does it mean? It means our birth-place—the place where we are born.
In the Srilamad Bhågavatam we find this verse:
satåì prasaígån mama v^rya-saìvido
bhavanti hùt-karòa-rasåyanåè kathåèHEART AND HALO
24
taj-jo£aòåd åßvapavarga-vartmani
ßraddhå ratir bhaktir anukrami£yati
(Srilamad -Bhågavatam 3.25.25)
“In the association of pure devotees, discussions
about Me are very pleasing and satisfying to the earand the heart. Such talks, which are full of spiritualpotency, are a source of sweetness, and by suchcultivation the path of liberation from worldly lifequickly opens. Then gradually one attains firm faith,which in due course develops into taste, and thenreal love for Me.”
This was spoken by the incarnation of the Lord,
Srila Kapiladeva, to his mother, Devah¨ti, in responseto her inquiry as to what is the real goal of life andhow to attain it. It came about in this way. Devah¨tiwas married to the sage, Kardama-r£i. After passingsome years in the enjoyment of married life,Devah¨ti conceived a child in her womb from theù£i. In Bhagavad-g^tå the Lord says: prajanaß cåsmi
kandarpaè , “Of Cupids, I am He who ensures
progeny.” And elsewhere it is said, prajanåya na
rataye , married life is not meant for enjoyment,
but for the purpose of producing good progeny.So, when the objective of their marriage wasachieved, the ù£iproposed that he retire fromJOURNEY TO THE CENTER
25
married life. He told Devah¨ti, “You have a child
in your womb and it is not an ordinary child; theLord Himself is coming. So I am going to livealone for my own higher purpose of life.” ThenDevah¨ti said, “I have such a good partner; I amfortunate to have a saint like you as my husband,but I did not take advantage of your noble person-ality to learn anything about brahma , about the
Lord, about my inner life’s necessity and its fulfill-ment. I did not inquire about that. I was only busyto serve you, to satisfy your desires. Though I hadsuch a noble companion, I did not utilize myfortune. Now I pray that you may stay for sometime and teach me, help me in spiritual life, andthen you may go.”
Kardama-ù£i said, “You will get help from your
son. It is the Lord Himself who is coming, not anordinary child. Remember this, and in time you willreceive that spiritual help from Him. So I won’tstay; I shall go now.” He departed, but soon thechild appeared and He was brought up by Devah¨ti.Because of her great motherly affection, however, asher son grew, she gradually forgot what her husbandhad revealed: that He was not an ordinary child. HEART AND HALO
26
In the course of time, when the boy had grown
and was one day absorbed, Devah¨ti was reminded,“Oh, the mood of my child does not seem to be ordi-nary.” She could understand that He was engaged indeep thought, and considered: “His father foretoldthat the Lord would appear through me, and now Isee it is true. My son’s mood does not seem to beworldly, but it is from above. His mind is absorbedin transcendental thought.”
She then slowly approached Him: “Child, your
father told me that You are not an ordinary boy ofthis world. You are divine. I wanted some spiritualadvice from him, but he told me that You wouldadvise me. For so long I did not heed that, but todayYour mood is encouraging me; it is reminding me ofthose words of Your father and encouraging me toapproach You for spiritual advice. Be pleased toadvise me about what is spiritual truth. Who am I?What is this world? How can I find the proper direc-tion of life? Who is the owner of this world, andwhat is my duty towards Him? You are not an ordi-nary boy, so I want to know all these things fromYou, my child.” Then from the lips of her son camethis verse, given in the Srilamad-Bhågavatam :JOURNEY TO THE CENTER
27
satåì prasaígån mama v^rya-saìvido
bhavanti hùt-karòa-rasåyanåè kathåètaj-jo£aòåd åßvapavarga-vartmanißraddhå ratir bhaktir anukrami£yati
(Srilamad -Bhågavatam 3.25.25)
Lord Kapila said, satåì prasaígån mama v^rya-
saìvido , “Talks about Me which are full of
potency can only be found coming from the lips ofMy devotees. Not only lip-deep words, but wordsthat have got depth, spirit, power, that representReality come from the lips of My real devotee.Such words are not shallow, but are surchargedwith spirit, with life, and can enliven us. Bhavanti
hùt-karòa-rasåyanåè kathaè , they satisfy both our
ear and our heart and give a taste of spiritual joy,rasåyanåè . Their words are surcharged with the
ecstasy of the spiritual world, and color our ear, ourmind, and our heart—physically, mentally, andalso on the plane of our soul. Taj-jo£aòåd , by
hearing from the real source, from that real sadhu ,
åßvarpavarga-vartmani , we are led towards relief
from this worldly life. By a gradual process, weattain these things: ßraddhå ratir bhaktir
anukrami£yati , first, ßraddhå , ever increasing faith;
then rati, slight taste; then we get real love, bhakti .HEART AND HALO
28
By anukrami£yati , a gradual process, we are taken
towards the higher domain.”
In this way the boy began to advise His mother,
Devah¨ti. This Devah¨ti-nandana, Kapila, was theson of Kardama-ù£i, but there was another Kapilawhose såíkhya philosophy does not recognize God;
it only analyzes the material elements, graduallyeliminating everything of spiritual substance. Sothere are two Kapilas, both of whom gave såíkhya
philosophy*: the divine son of Kardama-ù£i(Kardama Kapila) and the other, Såíkhyaka Kapila.Kapila, the son of Kardama and Devah¨ti, gave whatis known as såíkhya , but He has given recognition
to the Supreme Lord, îßvara, whereas the atheistKapila claimed îßvara-asiddhe , there is no neces-
sity of any God to explain the existence of this world.That is his conclusion. The nyåyikas (logicians) say
that there must be One who has created this world.This world has been created, so there must besomeone who has done it. Their highest conclusionis that there must be a creator, and He is God, îßvara.But the atheistic Kapila says, “No, there is no neces-sity of any God to explain the existence of thismaterial world: îßvara-asiddhe . His finding, hisJOURNEY TO THE CENTER
29*såíkhya : to enumerate or count.
conclusion, is that there is no necessity of a creator;
automatically everything exists. Only two thingsare necessary: first, a particle of spirit, and second,matter. Matter and spirit combined, ßiva and ßakti ,
have created this world. There are so many spiri-tual particles, like specks of sand or dust, and bytheir combination with matter this world is goingon automatically.
Once, while at the Madras Math, I met a
gentleman from Madhupur who was a follower ofthis school of thought. He was an educated Bengaligentleman, and I asked him, “What have you gotfrom your guru, that Kapila?”
He said “So many souls are there, yata j^va , and
everyone is a ßiva, independent of this matter.”
I said, “You are satisfied with this explanation?”“Yes, I am satisfied: påßa baddhaè bhavet j^vaè,
påßa muktaè sadå ßivaè (the soul while conditioned
is j^va, when liberated is ßiva).”
I told him: “Where your philosophy ends, our
philosophy, that of the Bhågavata school, begins.”
“How is it so?” that gentleman asked.“You will have to explain where these ßivas exist.
There are so many ßivas , like particles of spiritual
dust; but should we not think they must be living inHEART AND HALO
30
some position, and that there must exist some rela-
tionship between them? There are so many, andsome sort of relationship must be there betweenthem, and they must also stay somewhere, in someposition, some plane. And how are they harmonizedtogether, or are they each an independent unit, allfighting with one another? If not, then what is theirnature? The Bhågavata has come to explain about
the mukta-j^vas , the liberated souls. These souls,
who were once diseased, are now free from thatdisease. In their healthy condition, what do they do?What is their position, their characteristic, theirnature, their object, their pastimes? We have to knowthat. So, Bhågavatam has given us an explanation.”
Devar£i Nårada asked Vyåsadeva, “Explain what
is the normal, natural condition of the liberated soulswho are not diseased.” And that has been given.There is a Center, and all function in connectionwith Him and are all harmonized together.
In Srilamad Bhagavad-g^tå the Lord says:
yat såíkhyaiè pråpyate stånaì
tad yogair api gamyate ekaì såíkhyaì ca yogaì cayaè paßyati sa paßyati
(Bhagavad-g^tå 5.5)JOURNEY TO THE CENTER
31
“He has true vision who can see that the såíkhya
and yoga systems are one and the same.” One personis trying to reach the ultimate goal by external elim-ination, and the other by internal elimination: “thisis body, this is mind, this is soul ( åtma ), then super-
soul ( paramåtma ),” and onwards. The search is all
within. The process of elimination is within. Andby that he is trying to reach the core. And the other,by elimination of the elements of the external world(earth, water, fire, air, ether) is trying to understandthe Origin.
That is såíkhya: neti, neti, neti, “This is not it, this
is not it; this is dependent, this is also dependent; thisis not original, nor this, nor this. All are effects.Then what is the Cause?” To inquire through theexternal process is såíkhya , and the internal process
is through yoga— pråòåyåma, pratyåhåra, dhyåna,
dhåraòå, samådhi .* So by elimination of the effect
we come in contact with the cause; from the gross westart towards the subtle, and we reach more andmore subtle planes in the causal direction.
This is the process in both såíkhya and yoga.
But in the beginning of Srilamad-Bhågavatam ,HEART AND HALO
32*breath-control, withdrawing the senses from their objects,
concentration, meditation, full absorption and trance.
çukadeva Goswåm^, who is speaking to Parik£it
Mahåråj, begins his talk by saying that these two,såíkhya and yoga, and also sva-dharma parini£éhayå
(fulfilling one’s Vedic duty), can all give us libera-tion, but there is something more:
etåvån såíkhya-yogåbhyåì sva-dharma-parini£éhayå
janma låbhaè paraè puìsåm ante nåråyaòa-smùtiè
(Srilamad-Bhågavatam 2.1.6)
He says, etåvån, so far, by these processes, we are
told our liberation may be achieved: by såíkhya ,
external elimination; by yoga, internal elimination;and also by sva-dharma parini£éayå , discharging
one’s duty as it is recommended in the Veda. Toperform whatever is one’s respective duty as it isrecommended, without any special aim or object,is ni£kåma (action free from personal desire).
Because it has been advised by the såstra as my
duty in my present position, I am doing it, but in adisinterested way, without any special end. As abråhmaòa , I am told, “You must do these things,” so
I am doing them. As a k£atriya , my duty is to keep
the peace and control the evil-doers; that is my dutyand I am doing it. As a vaißya, I am advised to do
such and such. Because it is advised in the såstra , IJOURNEY TO THE CENTER
33
am doing my respective duty in a disinterested way,
that is, without any special aim or interest. All thesethree processes— såíkhya , yoga and Vedic duty—
lead us to liberation ( mukti ). But, janma låbhaè
paraè puìsåm ante nåråyaòa smùtiè , after we get
relief from the external bondage, the fulfillment oflife is in remembering our Lord Nåråyaòa, theCreator, and our relationship with Him. We mustget out of the net we are entangled in, and aftergetting release from this entanglement we mustsearch out our proper relationship with the PrimeCause. Who are we in our relationship with Him?Here the Bhågavata begins:
etåvån såíkhya-yogåbhyåì sva-dharma-parini£éhayå
janma låbhaè paraè puìsåm ante nåråyaòa-smùtiè
(Srilamad-Bhågavatam 2.1.6)
Janma-låbhaè means fulfillment of our exis-
tence, our birth; låbhaè means the gain, the fulfill-
ment, the end. What is that? Ante nåråyaòa-smùtiè ,
our connection, our reconnection with the Center,the all-harmonizing Center, that should be our goal,and the Bhågavatam comes to tell us this. So many
other ßåstras come to give us release from this
external bondage; but with internal progress, afterHEART AND HALO
34
crossing the marginal plane, we get admission into
the paravyoma , the special area, Vaikuòéha . That
is, we get the visa: ‘ virajå’, ‘brahmaloka’ bhedi’
‘para-vyoma’ påya . We catch the flow of the current
going towards the Center; that is the visa. Såíkhya ,
yoga and sva-dharma pariniséèayå can give us the
passport to get out of the land where we are living,but after that, if we want to attain something, then avisa is necessary. JOURNEY TO THE CENTER
35
HEART AND HALO
36
The
Real Judgment
of Love
According to Indian medical authorities, in
the body is air, bile and mucus, which corre-spond to air, fire, and water, three elements
in the ether that influence the earth. Earth is mainlyinfluenced by water, and water by heat, heat by air,and all are fighting, struggling within ether. This isthe nature of the material world. Then there is themental world, the manifestation of the mental energy:“I want this, I do not want that; I like this, I don’t likethat.” And, the intelligence gives direction to themind: “Don’t take this, take that.” But it is all withinthe ahaíkåra, material ego. Above that is the soul,
who experiences everything, good or bad. He iscalled puru£a :
puru£aè sukha-duèkhånåì, bhoktùtve hetur ucyate
(Bhagavad-g^tå 13.21)
“It is established that it is the conditioned living
being, puru£a himself who is the responsible cause
37
of the feelings of joy and sorrow which he experi-
ences in this world.”
This is the difference between spirit and matter.
Matter, called prakùti , is energy, but the soul, puru£a ,
experiences good and bad; he is the person whofeels good or bad, sorrow or happiness. He is of onesubstance, and that which is felt is of another:
kårya-kåraòa-kartùtve, hetuè prakùtir ucyate
(Bhagavad-g^tå 13.21)
“Certainly in this impermanent world all move-
ment occurs through the inherent quality of thepredominated material nature, prakùti, which is
responsible for both cause (the force of the senses)and effect (the material body).”
So all the activity we find here, all movement,
is due to that material energy, and the feeler of every-thing, the knower, the conceiver, is the soul. Thesoul is like the eye, an eye seeing anything andeverything.
In såíkhya philosophy, this prakùti-puru£a rela-
tionship has been compared to that of a blind manand a crippled man. A crippled man may ride onthe shoulder of a blind man. He who is moving(prakùti ), is blind; and he who is crippled, who is onHEART AND HALO
38
his shoulder ( puru£a ), has got eyes to see and can
guide. The soul is ‘crippled’; he cannot move, but hecan see. The blind man is the commander of theenergy, who can move here and there; he can carry,but he is blind. In this way, soul is the knower, thefeeler, the subjective existence, and the energeticaspect is that of the force, prakùti . So, there is force
and consciousness.
We are so much engrossed with force; we only
require the force, the energy, and we have forgottenthat we are the feeler of that force! That “feeler” isastonishing; if we try to understand our own self,we will be dumfounded: “Oh, what is this? I am ofsuch a nature! I have nothing to do with this worldof mortality; I can live independently of this mortalworld? Is it so?”
Then we will be able to understand further, that
there is Supersoul. In the material world there are somany different planes: the world of heat, that ofwater, of air. Everything is evolving from a moresubtle plane down to gross things, like stone orwood. Just as there is development in this directionin the material world, so in the subjective worldthere is also development, but upwards, from thesoul to Supersoul, to Super-Supersoul; in this wayTHEREALJUDGMENT OF LOVE
39
there is development and it is infinite. And we are
tataséha , marginal; our soul is in the marginal posi-
tion, between higher and lower, between the subtleside and the gross side. The upper side is eternal, itis sat-cit-ånandam , eternal, conscious and happy;
and here: asat, acit, nirånanda . It is
asat, flickering,
every minute it is dying; and acit, unconscious; and
nirånanda , with no feeling of joy or happiness.
These are the respective natures of thisworld, and of
thatworld. And if we want to have association with
that world, we are told that in the highest positionthere is infinite beauty, love, and ecstasy.
That world
can come down to us, and we can be taken in as oneof the Lord’s own family members. We can live as afamily member with the highest Entity of that world!Mahåprabhu told us it is possible, but only throughaffection, and not by knowledge or any mystic real-ization. By affection and love we can attract Him insuch a way that we can be given recognition as afamily member, a position very near to Him—tosuch an extent it is possible.
In Bhagavad-g^tå the Lord says:
tato måì tattvato jñåtvå, vißate tad anantaram
(Bhagavad-g^tå 18.55)HEART AND HALO
40
“After realizing My proper position, they enter
there; that is, into My own special jurisdiction, intoMy family.”
And the Bhågavatam says:
mamåtma-bh¨yåya ca kalpate vai
(Srilamad-Bhågavatam 11.29.34)
“They get such high recognition which qualifies
them to live with Me eternally, as My own. If theyselflessly come forward to satisfy Me, leaving asideeverything, ananya bhajana , if they want Me alone
and nothing else, then such is their future prospect.”
marttyo yadå tyakta-samasta-karmå
niveditåtmå vicik^r£ito metadåmùtatvaì pratipadyamånomamåtma-bh¨yåya ca kalpate vai
(Srilamad-Bhågavatam 11.29.34)
Sanåtana Goswåm^ has analyzed what is the
proper meaning of this expression åtma-bh¨yåya:
“My own,” they become “My own.” What is themeaning of “own”? He says it means to enter intoHis family; and “family” means there is gradation:the servant; the friends and their associates, the filialaffection group; the guardian group; and then thehighest group, that of consorthood. THEREALJUDGMENT OF LOVE
41
There is one story I heard from my godbrother
Vaikånasa Mahåråj, who was a bråhmaòa scholar of
Orissa, about an incident which occurred in recenthistory, in connection with the Jagannåtha Temple atPuri, where it was customary that no khechurånna
(kitri) used to be offered to the Lord.
Once there was a raid by the Mohammedans on
Orissa, and one of the girls of the royal family wasabducted for the pleasure of the Mohammedangeneral, by his soldiers. He later left the state, but thatgirl was left on the outskirts of some village or town,and there she gave birth to a child who was a greatdevotee. It was a very peculiar thing; the girl was alsoa devotee, but somehow she had to undergo such ahorrible experience. She gave birth to a child and helived on the outskirts of that town. When he grew uphe used to cook kitri, that is, rice and beans cooked
together, boiled into a half-liquid consistency, and heused to offer that to Jagannåtha from afar. By dint ofhis devotion, Jagannåtha had to go there and acceptthat kitri offering.
One day the boy was perhaps late in his offering;
Jagannåtha took the kitri but the time was then late
for the temple offering, so He had to run back toinstall Himself in His position in the temple, and aHEART AND HALO
42
particle of that kitriwas on His lips. The påòàås , the
pujåris (the priestly class) noticed: “What is this?
How has this happened? We can detect this is not theproper offering to Jagannåtha; then how is it here onHis lips?” So it was referred to the leader of thepåòàås and he also searched, but he could not ascer-
tain the cause. Then it was taken to the king and healso investigated it, “Who has taken this food andsmeared it on the mouth of Jagannåtha?”
Finally the priest who had been in charge at the
time of the offering of food in the temple was appre-hended: “You are responsible! You were in chargeof the temple at the time of Jagannåtha’s offering,then how has this impure thing come in His mouth?You must explain or you will be punished.” Theman was innocent and he said, “I do not knowanything; I do not know anything!”
Then, when he was about to be punished,
Jagannåtha came in a dream to the king as well as tothe leading priest: “That man is innocent; don’t disturbhim. On the outskirts of the town is My devotee. Heoffered that food to Me, and I ate it, but the time waslate and I had to hurry back to occupy My position inthe temple, so My mouth was not cleansed. This is thename of that boy. He is living there; he is My devotee,THEREALJUDGMENT OF LOVE
43
HEART AND HALO
44and I have taken this food there.” And it was as a
result of the Mohammedan’s exploitation of theprincess that this devotee appeared. So, Krishna -
bhakti , devotion to Krishna, does not care for the
formality of purity or impurity by any worldly consid-erations; it is independent.
Krishna -bhakti is so powerful and does not care
for anything. Jagannåtha accepted the offering ofthat boy who was considered to have the worst fate,a cursed fate. The princess was taken by theMohammedan, and her issue came in the form ofthat boy, so he was the “curse of the cursed.” But hisoffering attracted Jagannåtha so much.
So, love is wonderfully above everything,
surpassing all. Mahåprabhu asked us to accept thepath of love, which means giving one’s heart, one’sself. It is so powerful, nothing else can attractKrishna. He is very greedy to eat this love, thisprema . He lives on prema . He is the Lord of love.
That love has its inner existence; it is the inner exis-tence of all of us. He is Love personified, and thereis a tinge within us also; and like ‘birds of a feather,’love likes love.
Once Mahåprabhu, at the time when He had
conquered and captured the Kazi, was leading thesaík^rtana party and was feeling very tired. He came
45to Sriladhar Paòàit, the poor bråhmaòa who used to
sell plantains in the market to somehow meagerlyearn his livelihood. Sriladhar Paòàit had a well, andnearby an iron pot which he used for drawing water.Mahåprabhu began to drink water from the wellwith that pot, which had been left outside. All thedevotees objected, “What are You doing? This pot isalways kept outside and is very dirty. We arebringing a clean pot for Your drinking water!”Mahåprabhu ignored them and continued drinkingwater from that iron pot. He commented, “This is thepot of My devotee Sriladhar; it is purer than anything.”
In Bhagavad-g^tå the Lord says:
api cet suduråcåro, bhajate måm ananya-bhåk
sådhur eva sa mantavyaè, samyag vyavasito hi saè
(Bhagavad-g^tå 9.30)
“If a person is an unalloyed devotee who worships
Me exclusively, having abandoned all other pursuitsbased on exploitation and renunciation, even if hecommits some abominable action, he is to be consid-ered saintly. He is cent-per-cent pure, because hisendeavors are completely on My behalf and hisdetermination is fixed in that resolve.”
This is because one who has really surrendered to
Krishna is accepted by Him as His own, and such aTHEREALJUDGMENT OF LOVE
HEART AND HALO
46surrendered soul should never be considered impure,
a transgressor. So, what is bhajana ? It is a transac-
tion of the heart, not of any formality. In Krishnadevotion, Krishna -bhakti , the only consideration is
the dedication of the heart. Krishna wants that, andnot any external formality of the civilized or non-civilized world. In the case of Lord Råmachandraalso, we see that although in the highest considera-tion  He is the director of moral laws, n^ti, He could
not contain Himself when offered something withdevotion
by an ‘untouchable’ lady. And that was after
she had first taken it herself, after she had taken somesweet. Whatever remained that she considered mosttasteful, she kept for Råma, and He accepted it.
There is another incident that happened in
Vidura’s house. While Vidura was out collectingalms, Krishna suddenly appeared as a guest at hishouse. Vidura’s wife received Him, but there wasnothing to offer, only some bananas. So afterseating Him nicely she gave Him that, but she wasoffering the banana peels to Krishna and discardingthe fruit on the ground. She was so bewildered,overwhelmed by the joy of finding that Krishnawas suddenly present in her house, that she wasdiscarding the fruit and giving Him the peels, andHe was eating them.
THEREALJUDGMENT OF LOVE
47At that very moment Nårada and Vidura arrived.
Vidura exclaimed: “What are you doing? You areleaving the fruit and giving the peels to my Lord!”But Nårada came to her relief: “She is bewildered,but He who is eating is not at all disturbed! Onemight think that He would say, ‘Oh, give me thefruit. Why are you giving Me the peels?’ But He iseating without any concern.” Then Krishnaanswered, “I am eating neither the fruit nor the peels,but I am eating that which is devotion! I amaccepting her devotion. Neither the peel nor the fruitcan satisfy Me; I need neither the one nor the other,but I live on devotion, Nårada.”
patraì pu£paì phalaì toyaì,
yo me bhaktyå prayacchatitad ahaì bhakty-upahùtam, aßnåmi prayatåtmanaè
(Bhagavad-g^tå 9.26)
The Lord says, “I accept all those foodstuffs that
are offered; but actually it is not the food itself thatI take, rather it is the purpose behind that offering, theideal.  It is the very spirit of the thing I am concernedwith and never the outward show. I am living in theinner world, so with food also it is the innersubstance with which I am concerned, not the
external appearance.” Therefore it is said, bhåva-
gråh^-janårdanaè , “Lord Janårdana (Krishna) sees
the mood of devotion.” Devotion does not care forthe ordinary rules and regulations of this materialworld. Still, in our lower condition we are advised togo on with arcaòa , and depending on our stage of
realization, what we think to be pure we offer, andwhat is impure we reject. In the preliminary stage thisis necessary for our fortune, but as we advance theseexternal considerations are eliminated and theinternal ones are given more and more importance.
There is another story which illustrates this.
Vrajen Sil was a big scholar of Bengal, a scholar ofphilosophy so extraordinary that once after he haddelivered a lecture at the World Conference ofPhilosophy in Rome, the president of the meetingtold him, “I took you to be Aristotle!” He wasrespected as Aristotle, he was such a learned man.He had been a student of Scottish Church Collegein Calcutta and once was taking an examinationthere. While in the examination hall, he was giventhe questions and paper, and began to write hisanswers. Many questions were there, but he becameso engrossed in answering one particular questionthat he forgot everything else. So deeply engagedHEART AND HALO
48
was he in answering this single question that he
spent the whole time on it and ignored all the others.When the bell rang and the examination time hadexpired he was perplexed as to what to do? He hadonly dealt with one question; but he left his paperand went away.
He was the brightest student of the college, but
was thinking that his name could not possibly beon the list of successful candidates because he hadonly answered one question out of perhaps five orsix. But still he was stealthily coming to see if the listof successful candidates had been posted. Then oneday he found that his name had appeared at the headof that list. He was perplexed: “How is this? I onlydealt with one question and I am at the head of thelist; how is it possible?” So he asked the professor,“Sir, I had answered only one question; how then isit possible that you have given me first place?”
“Oh Mr. Sil, your answer is on the level of a
research scholar, not an ordinary student, so I gaveyou first place!”
So, this is like råga-marga where the formal things
are all ignored and the substance drawn out. Althoughnormally Mr. Sil should have placed amongst thelowest of those candidates who failed, the ProfessorTHEREALJUDGMENT OF LOVE
49
was a judge of a bold type and thought, “Oh, his
answer to just one question is of such high quality;this student can never be considered to be a failure.”Rather, he was given the highest position.
So, love is such: it does not care for any formality
in its real judgment. HEART AND HALO
50