An Introduction
to
Spiritual Life
Parts One to Four of this booklet were compiled from
informal discourses given by
Srila Bhakti Rak£ak Sriladhar
Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj
The Founder-President-Äcåryya of
Srila Chaitanya Såraswat Math, Nabadwip, India
http://www.scsmath.com
Part Five was originally published in 1934 in The Harmonist
Home Comfort was originally compiled and printed in 1992
and expanded in 1994 as a 2nd Edition
under the direction of The President Äcåryya
Srila Bhakti Sundar Govinda
Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj
under whose direction this revised and further expanded
6th printing is prepared in 1998
Transcribed by Srilapad B.S. Tridaòài Mahåråj and
Srila Mahånanda dåsa Bhakti Rañjan
Published by Srila Rasabdhi Brahmachary,
, , IndiaAll glories to Srila Guru and Srila Gauranga
HHHHoooommmmeeee    CCCCoooommmmffffoooorrrrtttt
6th Printing
About the Author
Srila Bhakti Rak£ak Sriladhar Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj is a
veteran ascetic preceptor of the original traditional saintlysuccession ordained by Srila Chaitanya Mahåprabhu, and he is the founder Äcåryya of the holy temple of puredevotion in Nabadwip, West Bengal, India, known as theSrila Chaitanya Såraswat Math. Established by Srila SriladharMahåråj in 1941, this sacred place of worship has becomethe gem of pilgrimage for devotees the world over whoare true aspirants for gaining entry into the divine land of surrender unto the Absolute Good. His spiritualrepresentation is hailed throughout the annals of spiritualIndia, not only for his encyclopaedic command of therevealed Scriptures, but for his undisputed acumen as a bona fide commentator of the archives of scripturaltreasures which were revealed by the venerable saintlypreceptors of the East. He is an unprecedented oracle who draws out the inner meaning and substance of theScriptures in an ever-progressive, expanding, dynamic,and living conception.
In 1985, three years prior to his departure from this
mortal world, Srila Sriladhar Mahåråj fulfilled a personalheart’s desire he had cherished for over forty years: heconferred the holy order of sannyåsa upon his most
beloved, confidential, and most senior associate-servitor,Srilamad Bhakti Sundar Govinda Mahåråj. Srila SriladharMahåråj, ever renowned for his keen intellect and spiritualforesight, could envisage the grave necessities of hismission in the future. He therefore named Srilamad B.S.Govinda Mahåråj as his successor Äcåryya-President forhis own Math, Srila Chaitanya Såraswat Math, and its
affiliated branches.
Foreword to the First Edition
I am feeling very fortunate to have come within the
personal association of Srila Bhakti Rak£ak Sriladhar Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj, our Srila Guru Mahåråj, and now to havethis chance to introduce this introduction booklet. Through-out his whole life Srila Guru Mahåråj practised what hepreached. The sincere practitioners are themselves anintroduction to the subject of genuine, joyful, spiritual life, but they are not able to visit everyone personally. Thereforewe are taking the opportunity afforded by the modernscientific age in order to print books to broadcast widely suchwisdom. The vibration emanating from a printing press inthis way can beneficially influence not only this mundaneworld, but it can even conquer souls already established inthe spiritual plane. It is therefore very joyful and satisfying to see the manifestation of this publication, Home Comfort—
An Introduction to Inner Fulfilment. It is a selection from our
Divine Master’s lectures introducing the subject of theisticspiritual life, and, for the service of his Divine Mission, it hasbeen reproduced in print-form by the sincere efforts of thestudent practitioners here.
Up until his last days in this mundane plane Srila Guru
Mahåråj would bestow his mercy upon the conditioned soulsin the form of lectures which he would sometimes delivercontinuously hour after hour. From his example we canunderstand the injunction of the Scriptures that until our lastbreath we must try to practise service to the transcendentalservice world—and give that same opportunity to others.
If anyone will carefully read this booklet with sincerity,
he must be benefitted and receive inspiration, as well as the opportunity, to reach towards that life of true innerfulfilment.
Humbly,
Swåm^ B.S. GovindaSrila Chaitanya Såraswat Math8 February 1992
PART ONE
Please listen attentively to
what I shall explain. In a scien-tific way I shall try to explainthe subject to you, in general,independent of all religiousconceptions.
First of all we are to under-
stand that there are three planesof life: the plane of mund-ane enjoyment, the plane ofrenunciation, and the plane ofdedication. The plane of enjoy-ment is where we are atpresent, more or less. Mundaneenjoyment means exploitation;and without exploitation, nonecan exist in this plane:
ahaståni sahastånåì
apadåni catu£padåm
laghuni tatra mahatåì
j^vo j^vasya j^vanam
“Those that have hands live
on those who have no hands.Four-footed animals live ongrass, creepers, etc. and the biglive on the small.” Everything isfull of life: creepers, grass, andtrees also have life, but withoutexploitation none can maintaintheir body here.
This is the plane of exploita-
tion, and, as Newton’s thirdlaw says, to every action thereis an equal and opposite reac-tion. By exploitation one takes aloan, and to clear that loan hewill have to go down. In thisway, there are so many j^vas
(souls) going up and down, upand down due to action and
reaction in the plane of exploita-
tion. Society is trying to exploitto the utmost; everywhere thereis the attempt to live at the costof others. Without it life isimpossible in this area becausethis is the plane of exploitation.
The Buddhists, the Jains, the
followers of çaíkara, and somany others are trying to getout of this entanglement ofexploitation and to find a lifewhere there is no exploitation,no action and reaction. Toavoid action and reaction theyMundane
enjoyment meansexploitation, andis reactionary
1
try to find a position of renun-
ciation, and they come to aconception similar to dreamlesssleep, that of samådhi: to with-
draw completely from theobjective world and to remainin the subjective plane. Withoutallowing their feelings to moveinto the lower plane, theyalways keep a subjective posi-tion, and that is something likedreamless sleep.
The Vai£òava section—those
who serve the Supreme Person-ality of Godhead—are of theopinion that there is another
world, the world of dedication.That dedication is just theopposite of exploitation. In themundane plane every unitwants to exploit the environ-ment, but in the plane ofdedication, every unit wants toserve the environment; and notonly the environment, but thereal key to the life of that planeis to serve the Centre. We areliving in an organic whole, soevery point must be true to theorganic Centre. The explanationis given in Srilamad-Bhågavatam
by the analogy of serving theroot of a tree:
yathå taror m¨la-ni£ecanena
tùpyanti tat-skandha-
bhujopaßåkhåè
pråòopahåråc ca yathendriyåòåìtathaiva sarvårhaòam acyutejyå
In the Vedic literature also,
we find it said, “Try to find theone by knowing whom every-thing is known:”
yasmin jñåte sarvvamidaì
vijñåtaì bhavati
yasmin pråpte sarvvamidaì
pråptaì bhavati
tad vijijñåsasva tadeva brahma
There is a central point by
knowing which, everything isknown, by attaining whicheverything is attained. The longand short of the entire Vedicadvice is to try to find out thatCentre. Therefore try to find
2
Renunciation is
like dreamless
sleep, but we are
to awaken to
the search for
the Centre
out that Centre. In the begin-
ning some may think this to bea ludicrous claim: “By knowingone, everything is known, bygetting one, everything isgot—what is this? Only a mad-man can say such a thing!” So,an analogy is given in Srilamad-
Bhågavatam: when you pour
water onto the root of a tree, thewhole tree is fed, and if you putfood into the stomach, thewhole body is fed, similarly, ifyou do service to the Centre,everything is served. It ispossi-
ble, and to do that, means toenter the plane of dedication.Avoiding the plane of exploita-tion, and also that of renuncia-tion, try to enter the plane ofdedication. Your åtmå , your
soul proper, is a member of thatplane. That is the real world,whereas this is the pervertedreflection.
The real world is where every
unit is dedicating itself to thewhole, represented by theCentre, just as in a healthy bodyevery atom will work for thewelfare of the whole body. If anatom works for itself, it exploitsto the extreme, and such localworks for local interest areclearly bad. Every part of thebody, and every atom, is towork for the welfare of the
whole system. There isa Centre,
and by the guidance of that it
will work. What is the position of the
Centre? It is mentioned inBhagavad-g^tå,
sarvva-dharmmån parityajya,
måm ekaì ßaraòaì vraja
(Bg. 18.66)
Kù£òa explains His position:
“Abandon all dharmmas (duties)
and just surrender unto Me.”
Now I want to represent this
conception from another stand-point.
Hegel was a good German
philosopher and his philosophyis known as perfectionism. Hehas given an idea: the Absolute
Truth, the Prime Cause of every-
thing, must have two qualifica-tions. What are they? It must beby itself and for itself.The Prime Cause
is by itself and foritself
3
Please try to pay attention. By
itself means that He is His own
cause—nothing else createdHim. If anything has createdHim, that creator will have theprimary importance. Therefore,to be the Absolute He must beanådi, eternally existing and not
created by anything. The Abso-
lute must have this qualification.
The next qualification is that
the Absolute Truth is for itself.
He exists for His own satisfac-tion, not to satisfy any other. IfHis existence is to satisfyanother entity, then He will besecondary, and they for whosesatisfaction He is living will
have the prime position.
Therefore, the Absolute must
have these two qualifications:He is His own cause, and Heexists only to satisfy Himself, tofulfil His own purpose. TheAbsolute is by itself and foritself. If any straw moves, itmoves to fulfil the purpose ofthe Absolute. Everything—every incident, and whateverhappens—must have to be forHis satisfaction. So the realcurrent is His l^lå, His Pastimes,
but ourselves we are guided byseparate interest: family interestor country interest or socialinterest or humanitarianism,etc. But in the infinite consider-ation it is all only a tiny part,and we are all engaged in
acting for such separate interest.
There is a clash betweeninnumerable separate interestsand so there is trouble. But wemust leave all our so-calledspecial interests, come out frommisunderstand
ing, and try to
attain the function of a unit
active for the cause of the whole.
The conclusion of Bhagavad-
g^tå given by Kù£òa is “Sarvva-
dharmmån parityajya— Give up
all your duties which you think
at present you have to discharge,
and— måm ekaì ßaraòaì vraja—
surrender to My feet.”
ahaì tvåì sarvva-påpebhyo
mok£ayi£yåmi må ßucaè4
The Absolute is
His own cause
and He exists
only to satisfy
Himself
“I shall release you from all
the troubles of which you canever conceive.”
In other words you are to
remember to be faithful to theCentre. At present all yourrespective duties are for localinterest, but give up the localidentification of your owninterest and merge totally in theinterest of the organic whole.
We see that if a police officer
takes even three rupees for hisown purpose, he is punished,but if he kills so many for theinterest of the country, he isrewarded. Similarly, whateveris done for the satisfaction ofthe whole is good, but if you doanything for yourself or anylocal friend, you will have to bepunished. In an industry, wehave no right to take a bribe forour personal purpose, at thesame time we have no right tocall a strike, to close down thelabour force, for then theindustry will be destroyed.
Neither exploitation nor
renunciation will do. Exploita-tion is clearly bad, and because
we have no right to go on strike,
renunciation is also bad. In anorganic whole the commoninterest is that everyone mustbe dedicated to the Centre, andto the Centre means to thewhole. When we put food intothe stomach, the stomach willdistribute it properly to everycorner according to its necessity.
That sort of life is Vai£òavism.
There is an organic whole, andwe are a part of that. We haveour special duties in connectionwith the whole, and that is
proper dedication for the whole .
We are not to put food into theeye, or into the nose, or the ear,
or anywhere except the stomach,
then only will it be distributedproperly and the whole organ-ism will be healthy. All of usare parts of the whole universe,and our duty is to work for theWe are parts of
the wholeuniverse, and ourduty is to workfor the benefit ofthe whole
5
whole, and that is devotion,
dedication, surrender. Andhow are we to know aboutthat? We will receive help fromthe revealed Scriptures, and
from the many saints and agents
who are also coming from thatplane to bring us into harmony.
The religion of highest har-
mony has been given byMahåprabhu Srila Chaitanyadevwho explained devotion on thebasis of Srilamad-Bhågavatam, the
book which is understood to bethe real conclusion of all therevealed Scriptures. In this wayHe explained that energy orpower is not the highest thing,
but knowledge is above it.Knowledge can control powerand give a beneficial result, butfurther, knowledge itself alsoholds a lower position: above itis love and affection, and that isthe highest. Neither knowledgenor power, but only affectioncan give us fulfilment of life.
Mercy is higher than justice.
Justice only exists where thereis the necessity of laws, rules,etc., but in the realm of theAbsolute Autocrat, who is theAbsolute Good, there can be noquestion of any apprehensionabout Him. He is AbsoluteGood, and Absolute Good isAbsolute Love and Affection,and that is home! Back to God,back to home. What is home? Itis where we find that we are inthe midst of our well-wishers. Ifwe do not care for our ownbenefit, then there are so manywho will take care of us—infact the whole environment willtake care of us—and that ishome. That is the domain of the Absolute, and we can enterinto His service, the highestposition, and thereby see theaffection, love, harmony, andbeauty that exist there. All thesequalities are similar and theyconstitute the nature of thePrime Cause and Good, and weare to go there.
Misusing our free-will we
6
Affection, love,
harmony, and
beauty constitute
the nature of the
Prime Cause
have been somehow led astray
but now we are being called,“Come home, back to God andback to home, the highest posi-tion, the land of love.” This is,in general and in short, the sumtotal which I have presented toyou—this is the Kù£òa concep-tion in Bhagavad-g^tå and in
Srilamad-Bhågavatam, and it is the
conception that has been givenby Srila Chaitanyadev. This SrilaChaitanya Såraswat Math andthe whole of the Gauà^yaMission is preaching only forthat. “Go to the Centre, useyour life for total dedication tothe Centre, and the Centre is allabove justice. It is all-merciful,affectionate, loving, and beauti-ful.”
This is a general background
of Vai£òava religion, of Srilamad
Bhagavad-g^tå and Srilamad-
Bhågavatam and a brief history
of all conceptions of religion—that is, exploitation, renuncia-tion, and dedication are thethree planes of life, and the soulproper is a member of the land
of dedication. All are dedicating
units but somehow, by misusing
their partial free-will, they have entered into the world of exploitation. Buddha, Jain,Pareßanåth and others havehelped those who want to with-draw from here, to get out ofthe entanglement of exploita-tion—of action and reaction—by complete retirement. They
have said that after retirement,the soul can live happily. Still,there may be the possibility ofagain becoming entangled inthis trap, but where the really
free souls live, all are dedicating
units, and when we want totrace what is harmonising themand maintaining them in thatplane we shall see that all areworking for the whole, and thewhole is represented by the oneAbsolute Good. We are to seeall these things, and for this thehuman birth is very valuable.In connection with the sådhus—Only by misusing
our free-will havewe entered this plane ofexploitation
7
the saints, the agents—we shall
try our best to get out of thisentanglement and enter into theland of love, dedication, andaffection.
We have already published
several books, and there aremany old scriptures which alsohelp us understand properlyand in a more detailed wayabout all ontological aspects ofreligion.PART TWO
Our home is full of freedom,
more comfort—everything. It isa place where there is a naturaltransaction of faith, love, affec-tion, etc. It is inconceivable. TheUpani£ads say, “Don’t venture
to test the unthinkable plane
with your reasoning. That plane
really is beyond the capacity of your thought. It is under adifferent set of laws. Yourmathematical calculations andconclusions in this world areacquainted with points, planes,and solids. At present you are aman in the world of solids, andyou have some limited assoc-iation with planes and points in
a somewhat abstract way, there-
fore how can you calculateabout higher things of whichyou have no knowledge? Theways of living and the laws ofthat country are all unknown to
you, so you cannot try to debate
about that. That plane is ofquite a different nature.”
If your understanding is
limited to the laws of water,then how can you calculateabout air? Similarly if you arefamiliar only with the laws ofair, how can you make anycalculation within the sphere ofether? Therefore, don’t rush tobring within your experimentallaboratory those items whichare beyond the capacity of
8
We are residents
in the world of
solids, but the
higher plane is of
quite a different
nature
your thinking, for that will be
foolishness.
Higher things do exist, but
the general man in this worldhas no knowledge about them.We are indeed experiencers andhave some knowledge, but onlyto a particular degree andstandard. We cannot venture tocalculate what is beyond ourreach. But if those who actuallyhave experience of that planewill come to us and give ussome information, then we canmake some comparison: “Thisgentleman of a particularexperience of ether has writtenin this way, another gentlemanwho has experience and hasalso experimented about ether
has written in another particular
manner.” In this way we cangain some understanding fromtheir investigation and theirreal connection with the subjectmatter.
In the section of those inves-
tigating about telescopes, wecan make a comparison of theirfindings. The experience of oneresearcher with his telescope isof a certain type and we canalso learn about the experienceof others with their particular
telescopes. With the information
available to us from their actualconnection with the telescopesand their experiments, we may
be able to conclude that perhaps
a certain telescope was morepowerful, another more power-
ful in a particular field, etc. So,we have some limited capacityto compare what has beendiscovered beyond our sensesby means of the telescope, eventhough we ourselves may nothave a telescope.
The subject of the higher
things discovered by the mental“telescope
,”or soul’s “teles-
cope ,” has been dealt with in
the Scriptures. Such subjectmatter is known by the saints,and we are to take their help inWe are to learn of
higher thingsfrom those whoare trulyacquainted with them
9
order to have entrance within
that land. We are not at presentin a position to have experienceof the higher plane, but later, bythe help of the saints and Scrip-tures, when we shall ourselveshave that type of telescope, wewill be able to have such higherexperience.
sve svehadhikåre yå ni£éhå
sågunåè parik^rttitåè
“To pay attention to your
own plane is admirable.”
acintyaè khalu ye bhåvå
na tåìs tarkeòa yojayet
Don’t let the argumentative
spirit overshadow everything.Argument is not all in all: it isnot that it must be the resort of
every belief. The spiritual realmis acintya, inconceivable, but
still we are to try to understand
things according to our capacity,
faith, and realisation. Above all,
we have to accommodate within
our mind that sweetness issweet, and truth is truth, how-ever strong it may be, but weshould not take any standardfrom here and apply it to thathigher realm.
If one has no eyes but another
can see, the blind man willnaturally seek help from theone who has vision. We are also blind to what is within our-selves otherwise what is the
necessity of consulting a doctor?
The doctor can see what wecannot: he will diagnose and
then we will undergo treatment.
Naturally we will have respectand will give him somethingfor his assistance—it is notunreasonable.
The Guru is the specialist
doctor, and we will understandhis qualification when we cometo see that what he says is realand not imaginary. Such visionwill depend upon the degree ofawakenment of the eye. If onewho is blind is treated by a
capable doctor he will gradually
directly perceive, “Yes, I beginto see something. I now havesome eye experience.” Fromthat time on he won’t care for
10
We need
treatment from
the specialist for
our blindness
the speculative opinions of the
other blind people, but he willhave his direct capacity to see.With the coming of sight he canunderstand that the applicationof the medicine has some realeffect.
Scientific understanding is
also similar. In earlier days when
Faraday discovered electricity,
many people laughed, “What isthis? It is mere curiosity. Whatutility can we have from thiselectricity?”
I once read an account of
Faraday demonstrating anexperiment to show the effect ofhis discovery. He generatedelectricity with a machine andthen he showed small pieces ofpaper being moved by thatelectric current. Many weresatisfied to see his new discov-ery, but then a lady remarked,“But after all this, Mr. Faraday,what practical benefit shall wederive from this luxury play ofyours.”
Faraday replied, “Madam,
please can you tell me what isthe utility of a newborn babe?”His point was that when a babyis born we are to take care ofhim, then, when grown, hisenergy will be put to work use-fully. Similarly, some considerthat God consciousness is onlya luxury, a fashion, or likeplaying—that it has no practicalapplication or direct utility. But when God consciousness
becomes intense, those whoexperience it will see all otheractivities, however apparentlyimportant, to have no value.Why? Because ultimately wewant to live. We don’t want todie.
To live is the main necessity
and the general necessity of allof us. No one can deny thatthey want to live, and not onlylive, but live happily, properly,and consciously. Furthermore,we want to avoid all affliction,misery, etc.
When God consciousness
No one can deny
that they want tolive happily,properly, andconsciously.
11
arises within someone, he can
see clearly, “Why is everyoneengaged in a wild goose chasein this material world? Every-one wants happiness, but all are running after an imaginaryphantasmagoria.”
Happiness can never be with
mortal things. We are making atransaction with the mortalworld, but that cannot bringsatisfaction; it can only lose ourenergy. What we collect on oneside, disappears on another. Awise man should neither acceptnor tolerate this sort of waste ofenergy as the principle of life.Such a wise person can see
another plane of life. He can seethat he is not a party to thismortal world which is like aplace of playing. He will feel, “Iam immortal. I am a member ofthe eternal world but I havesomehow become entangled inthis mortal aspect of existence.So, as soon as I can shake offthis connection I shall thenstand in a normal position.” Hewill find that he himself—thesoul, the feeler, the conceiver—is a member of another soil buthe has become entangled with-in this mortal pain-producing
world. This is a miserable world.
With the strength of his realisa-tion he can make improvementin his progress to the immortalplane.
As proof positive comes
before us we shall feel sure,“Now I see these things andhear these things, and thisexperience is all more real thanthe world about me. The world
is vague, but what I now see and
hear is more real than that.”
A direct transaction is pos-
sible with the soul, with God,and with God’s land. Where weare presently living is the planeof indirect transactions: first theeye, ear, etc. collect experience,then it goes to the mind beforewe can have experience of thisworld. But in the case of thesoul, we can feel everything
12
The mortal world
cannot bring
true satisfaction;
it can only lose
our energy
directly ourselves without the
help of any instrument.
Through a microscope we see
one thing, and through thenaked eye we see somethingelse. There is a difference.Through the eye, ear, etc. wehave some experience of thisworld, but concerning the soul,if we can withdraw from the“progress” in the negative side,we shall be able to feel, “Oh!This is the nature of the soul.”
We shall directly feel who weare without the help of anyinstrument.
The soul can see itself, it can
focus upon itself and throughintrospection he will realise hisvery nature. Through the pro-cess of introspection the soul,without the help of any otherinstrument, will percieve allpossible conceptions of himselfdirectly. He will then under-stand his own soil: he will gainthe conception of a higher typeof soil. On that positive side hewill discover: “I do not die.”
The material plane is the
plane of misrepresentation andmisunderstanding, but in thehigher plane there is no misun-derstanding. Once admittedthere, our conception, though itmay be partial, will be clear andtrue. Anyone having thatexperience will be convincedand he will be determined to goforwards.Socrates could feel that the
soul was immortal. He was sointense with his feeling that hedid not give any value to his
own life in this mundane world.
He neglectfully disconnectedhimself from this worldbecause with great convictionhe knew the soul to be immor-tal. Christ also was so muchconvinced of his Lord that hedid not give any care for thehappiness and pleasures of thisworld: he neglectfully rejectedit all. Through
introspection thesoul will gain theconception of ahigher type of soilof immortality
13
There are many things
invisible to this fleshy eye thatare visible with the eye ofknowledge. We can concedethat the eye of knowledge cansee many things which thefleshy eye cannot. Similarly adeep vision exists by which wecan see things in a different,more hopeful way: “Come andsee!” An eye cannot see when itis covered by a cataract, butwhen the cataract is removedthe eye can see. Ignorance islike a cataract in our eye thatcauses us blindness. Our visionis only superficial, but deepervision can see many things.This eye backed by the eye
of knowledge can see manythings—deeper and deeper.
Our apparent sight has no
value. Real value is present inthe seer who can see withdeeper vision. And all are notequal: there are the wise, thewiser, the even wiser… There isgradation, and according to hiscapacity the seer will see.
It is easy to see that at present
we are members of this mortalworld, but by what are weconnected? It is our body that isthe member. If we can go abovet
he body we can go to the mind,
then on to the intelligence , then
to the soul. We will find thatthe plane where the souls live iseternal, and the soul itself isalso eternal. From there we can go on to search after theSupersoul, the origin of all ourthoughts. The Supersoul islikened to the sun which is theorigin of all rays of light. Oncewe find a ray of light we canapproach the sun from whichall rays emanate. Similarly,from the conception of our ownselves, knowing ourselves to beparticles of consciousness, wecan search out a plane of super-consciousness, super-
knowledge, and super-existence.
In this way we can progress tothe ultimate cause, the source of all. But we cannot go justaccording to our own whim
14
With deep vision
we can see in a
different, more
hopeful way
and freedom, some sort of help
from that plane is indispensably
necessary. Such help comes in
the form of Guru, the Vai£òavas,
and other agents of that land.With their help we can makehonest progress towards thegoal.
At present we are as if
monarchs of all we survey, butwhat we survey is all transient,mortal, and reactionary. If welook scrutinisingly we will seeit is all reactionary. What ispleasing today, will later onturn into pain, therefore wemust seek a good positionsomewhere else, a good placeto build our home elsewhere. Inthe course of that search wewill find that we do have ourown home, and it is all-perfect.
“Home. Back to God, back to
home—sweet, sweet, home.”
This sort of feeling we shall findwithin us if we are fortunate to
be allowed a little participationby the grace of the canvassersof that land: the agents of theLord. We shall be taken to thatproper soil and we shall gainsome solid familiar type ofconception of what our realhome is like. In this way weshall progress to that side.
In the beginning we may
think that we shall be going to some unknown quarter:“Innumerable living entities arehere around me in my presentworld, but where I am now
trying to go, that is uncertain. Itseems imaginary and abstract.”However when we begin ourjourney we will gradually findthat almost all existence is inthat side, the side where all are
truthful. We shall find that thismaterial side is very meagreand limited, and here there isonly a tiny representation of thetruth.
From here we may think that
most of the existence is here and
only a very few special souls goIn the course of
our search we willfind that we dohave our ownhome, and it isall-perfect
15
from here to the immortal world
such as Socrates, Muhammad,
Buddha, etc. But gradually wewill come to understand thatthe higher world is infinitelygreater than the mundaneportion we see here. We willgradually come to understand
that as in a country a few people
are confined in a hospital or a prison and are suffering,similarly a few persons are here in this mundane plane aspunishment. As this becomesclearer to us we shall feel morecourage to proceed, and with
greater speed will shall runtowards our home. Let us gohome, and the nearer we are tohome, our speed will increasemore and more, “Oh. This is my
homeland!”
At present we are outside
and our mind is also focusedoutside. We are helplesslymoving. Our hope lies only inthe grace of the divine agents.They come to pick us up andwarn us, “What are you doing?Don’t go on that side. It is theland of danger, the land ofdeath. Come along with me. Ishall take you to the land ofeternal nectar.” Those agentscome to arouse us from ourslumber, our ignorant madness.They are the Vai£òavas, and
they have also given the Scrip-tures which give some historyof the land outside and of thesaints who have gone there.Through the Scriptures ourfaith will gradually developand we will increasingly keepassociation with the sådhus. In
so doing we shall make everquicker progress.
One’s own feeling is the
guarantee as to whether he ismaking real progress or not.
Hùdayeòåbhyanujñåto . He will
receive approval from his ownheart that he is making realprogress. Otherwise, a manmay be coaxingly taken in a
16
The agents of
divinity, come to
give us news of
our homeland:
the land of
eternal nectar
particular direction only to feel
frustration after some time, but such a transaction is notgenuine—it is false, a hoax. Inthe name of religion so manysuch things do go on, like atrade, but that does not meanthat real realisation and realemancipation do not exist.Hùdayeòåbhyanujñåto— the
ultimate guarantee is theapproval of your own heart,“Yes. Really this is what I want.From the innermost core of myheart I feel the desire to danceto find that such progress ispossible.”
PART THREE
Normally in this world we
are men of action, men whoexploit the environment andnature in order to gatherenergy. Always there is theattempt to collect more andmore energy to use at ourcommand, and to save some-thing so it may be utilised inthe time of necessity. In general,that is the very nature of thosewho live here. And if anyhindrance will come in thatattempt then it is consideredthat those circumstances arevery bad because they oppose
the object of life here, which is to collect more energy. However,
to remind us about the impor-tance of the inner wealth we areadvised that the outer naturecannot do as much harm to usas our internal nature can do in its apathy to collect morewealth for the inner existence:
17
the man within. We are to be
mindful of this point: whatcomes from outside is not soimportant—it all comes andgoes. Even the body which is at present the centre of ourthoughts will vanish, therefore
what is the necessity of collecting
so much energy in connectionwith this body? Awaken fromwithin your soul the properman within you. Try to findhim and try to collect help forhim. This campaign is possibleonly with the connection of thesådhu, the saint.
We shall be the loser on any
day in which we do not meetwith a saint, and hear anydiscussion about the innermeaning and substance of life.Be conscious of this. In allrespects and anyhow, be mind-ful of your own person. Lookafter your own interest byfinding your own self. Beunmindful towards the externalworld and circumstances anddive deep into the reality, yourinner wealth. Find your innerself and the inner world withinwhere your inner self is living.Try to find that home. Back toGod, back to home. Utilise yourenergy only for going home,and not for wandering into theland of others: the land ofdeath. Try to avoid the land ofdeath at any cost, and alwaystry to find out the eternal soil.You are to find out that you area member of that soil. Try tounderstand what is your home,and why that is your home.What does home comfort mean?
It means it is the natural placewhich is our birth-right. Wehave to face the fact that we are not at home. But if there issome hankering within us tosearch for that, we are fortu-nate.
Our necessity is to find
how that inner thirst can bequenched. Our feeling should
18
Find your inner
self and the inner
world within
where the inner
self is living. Try
to find that home
be: “The world is here and I am
here, but I am unsatisfied. Howcan my inner self be satisfied.”We are in want, therefore bywhat process can this want be removed? For the present we have this fleshy body, but to know anything and every-thing about the body—aboutthe bones, nervous system,blood, etc.—is all unnecessary.To know about the composition
of the blood, etc. is just unneces-sary detail. Our enquiry should
be regulated in this way: “Whoam I, and why am I troubled? Ido not know how to rid myselfof these problems.” This is thegeneral question and we are tobe concerned with that.
“Athåto brahma-jijñåså— from
where have I come? How am Iliving, and what is my future?”These are the main questionsthat should concern us, and wemust concentrate the whole ofour energy to find the solution.This does not only apply to justone person—myself—but this isthe concern of all creation.
To seek the source of every-
thing is the nature of properenquiry, but to enquire afterthis and that and so manyhundreds of things is simply awaste of energy. The ßåstric
(Scriptural) enquiry has beencouched in such a way: “Fromwhere have I come? What
sustains me? What is my future?Why am I uneasy, and how canI acquire my inner fulfilment?”All enquiry should follow thisstandard way, otherwise thereis some disease of enquiry: itwon’t be proper enquiry. Moreand more curiosity may arisewithout end, therefore we mustlearn how to question, how toenquire, and in that way ourenergy will have some valueand won’t be wasted.
Enquiry is bona fide when
it is directed towards how to
fulfil the real goal, therefore we are to save our energy and
regulate it in the proper channel.
This is Kali-yuga— the age ofFrom where have
I come? How am Iliving, and whatis my future?
19
quarrel—and our real and only
helpful necessity in life is thecompany of the establishedsaints and the Holy Name ofKù£òa— sådhu-saíge kù£òa-nåma .
Otherwise, deviating from that,we may be misguided at anyand every step.
sådhu-saíge kù£òa-nåma ei måtra cåi
saìsåra jinite åra kona vastu nåi
Srila Chaitanya Mahåprabhu
gave this as the substance of alladvice, and there is nothingmore useful than this to help usget out of undesirability.
He says that to chant Kù£òa-
nåma but without the associa-tion of the sådhus also means
that it will be very difficult forus to proceed. Therefore in oneword the solution is in sådhu-
saíga. We are to secure the
company of a standard realisedsoul, then everything will fallinto place, and the king of thesådhus is the Guru. Gurudeva is
the king of the the good-menwho can give guidance. For oneto be Guru it means that he can guide us satisfactorily,otherwise whom can we believeand trust to our utmost under-standing, and to whom can wefully submit and surrender?The Guru is where our enquirywill be fulfilled to its utmostnecessity. From him higherdirection will come from above,from a more and more elevatedsphere of love. We are toconnect with that high andsubtlemost wave and we willbe more benefitted. This is thegeneral idea.
On the whole, we are to try
to always be at the disposal of the higher agency, at thedisposal of the higher
thinkers
of the higher provinces. In that
way we shall come in connec-tion with the higher and mostsubtle layer of life. There aredifferent waves of differenttypes and interests, and ofdifferent loss and gain, but toconnect with the highest shouldbe our aim.
20
In one word the
solution lies in
“sådhu-saíga,”
associating
with the saints
We are to see that the charm
of this life is finished. Alreadywe have had good experiencethat this is all stale. After all,wherever there are the fourenemies, janma, mùtyu, jarå,
vyådhi— birth, death, old age,
and disease, there cannot beany real happiness. Whereverthere is death there cannot beany happiness. In such a planewe are always under the threatof death, so there is no charm:
all charm is completely finished.
Therefore, with eagerness wemust make enquiry as to where
we shall be able to live. We must
select a higher plane where wecan really live.
yad gatvå na nivartante,
tad dhåma paramaì mama
(Bg. 15.6)
In Srilamad Bhagavad-g^tå Kù£òa
says, “The place from whichthere is no returning to thisdeathly plane is My supremeabode.”
åbrahma-bhuvanål lokåè,
punar åvartino ’rjjuna
måm upetya tu kaunteya,
punar janma na vidyate
(Bg. 8.16)
He instructs Arjjuna, “A
permanent position is only pos-sible in My plane. All occupa-tions in this plane, even that ofa king, are all just as in a dream.So if you want to get out of thisdreaming life and enter intoreality then raise yourself to thestandard of finding the plane of
reality, however subtle it maybe, for that cannot be devoured
by death. Collect your energy tobuild up something permanent.
At present you are investingyour energy in something thatis going to be demolished at the next moment—a foolishattempt.”
uddhared åtmanåtmånaì,
nåtmånam avasådayet
åtmaiva hy åtmano bandhur,
åtmaiva ripur åtmanaè
(Bg. 6.5)Raise yourself to
the standard offinding the planeof reality… it cannot bedevoured by death
21
“Note that you are your own
friend. But you are your ownenemy also. You are your ownenemy if you don’t take goodcare of your own developmentfor your real progress. But youcan be your own friend, andnone can give as much help toyou as you, yourself, can do.”
bandhur åtmåtmanas tasya,
yenaivåtmåtmanå jitaè
(Bg. 6.6)
“If at all you can have any
self-control then collect yourenergy from going astray anddirect it to the proper channelwhere you can really thrive,
and then you will be your realfriend. However, if you allow
yourself to be led by the various
senses of lower nature whichare always trying to move in the land of exploitation,reaction, and suffering then youare your own enemy. Considerall these things.”
vimùßyaitad aße£eòa,
yathecchasi tathå kuru
(Bg. 18.63)
“Consider and consider
deeply, then take the right stepas to what to do.” The humanlife is very valuable. You havethe power of discrimination,but that will be denied you if,compelled by the reactionarywave, you have to go into the body of a tree, a beast, orwherever. Can you say forcertain that in your next lifeyou will not be degraded intoan animal body? What guaran-tee is there that you won’t be?
It is not that all action and all
progress takes place only in therealm of death. Progress is notlimited just to darkness andignorance, but if you reallyparticipate in positive progressyou will be able to feel whatreal progress is. Hùdayeòåbhya-
nujñåto— you will feel and
conceive the progress with yourinner approval, your heart’sapproval. It is not that somebogus hope has been given and
22
Be your own
friend: none can
give as much help
to you as you,
yourself, can do
you will be taken into a foreign
land to be murdered, tortured,mistreated, etc. There is noquestion of that.
bhaktiè pareßånubhavo viraktir
anyatra cai£a trika eka-kålaèprapadyamånasya yathåßnataè syustu£éiè pu£éiè k£ud-apåyo ’nu-ghåsam
(Bhå: 11.2.42)
This famous ßloka of Srilamad-
Bhågavatam explains that when
you eat something, your bellywill give witness. It will say,“Yes I am eating.” Hunger will
be satisfied, the body nourished,
and there will be the fulfilmentof having been fed. The bodywill be nourished and will gainstrength, and, along with allthis, will be your own innerapproval of having eaten. Fur-
thermore there will be no longer
any feeling of necessity to eatmore and more. Similarly inspiritual life so many symp-toms will come to give proof ofyour progress.
We now have a human body,
and this is the most valuabletime for us, but it is being lostdue to misapplication. Ourmost valuable energy is beinglost through misappropriation.Utti£éhataè jågrataè prapyo varånnibodhataè— so, awake, arise,
and engage yourself not onlyfor you, but address others alsoto engage in this campaign, and that in turn will give youfurther help in a particular way. The main thing is that under
the guidance of a higher agentwe should engage ourselves indevotional activities and have abusy programme so there maynot be any spare time to go onwith any trifling mundane mat-ters. Such a busy programme inthe association of the devoteeswill be very helpful for us.In spiritual life so
many symptomswill come to giveproof of yourprogress
23
PART FOUR
Internal self-satisfaction, to
disregard the present environ-ment of the troublesome world,is a valuable asset. It is nearingthe soul area. Real bhakti, devo-
tion, is ahaituk^ , causeless; it is
its own cause. It is causelessand it is by itself. As Hegel said,reality is by itself. Reality is notan abstract thing, but realitymeans a system, a system that exists by itself. It is anådi
and ahaituk^, it is eternal, and
nothing can produce it. Bhakti is
its own cause. These are thedefinitions that have been givento help us to understand whatis bhakti. It is not created by
some other thing, it is thereeternally, but it is only coveredand should be uncovered,discovered. It is there in apotential form. By outside helpit will gradually and progres-sively come out: it is as if
sleeping—it is necessary torouse it. Anyåbhilå£a, karmma,
jñåna —fleeting desires, and the
organised attempts for bothexploitation and retirement orindifference, are the covers. Wehave to remove these coversand then bhakti will emerge in
all its pristine glory.
To have affinity and attraction
towards the higher truth is veryrarely found, especially in thismodern age where the directionof thought is all towardsexploitation, even of knowl-edge. Knowledge being alsosubservient to exploitation iscreating havoc. Atomic energyand so many other kinds ofscientific research are the cause
of great apprehension: the world
is threatened with destructionat any moment. This scientificknowledge has brought us tosuch a position that at anymoment the whole thing maybe finished! This knowledge issuicidal. The increase of suchknowledge in this world meansthe result is that we are going tocommit suicide. Exploitationmeans reaction. So, if we are to accept general, wholesale,exploitation then the result will be pralaya, mahå-pralaya,
destruction—wholesale. In anyway, whether by the atomicbomb or by any other naturalincident, the pralaya will come,
24
and after that, again creation:
birth and death, birth anddeath… Each individual will beborn and die again, and thewhole solar system will also beborn and will die again andagain without end.
If we are to get out of this
entanglement, we must leavethis atmosphere experienced byour senses. In Bhagavad-g^tå
and in the Upani£ads also it is
mentioned, indriyåòi paråòy
åhur. Our senses hold the prin-
ciple position, because if theeye, ear, nose, touch, etc. aregone, then the whole world isgone from us. Because we havesenses we have our world. Inthe world of experience, our
senses are all-important. Then—
indriyebhyaè paraì manaè— the
mind is within. And what is themind? It is the faculty within uswhich selects, “I want this, Idon’t want that.” We have aliking for something, and adisregard for something else,and this is the principle of themind within us. It is moreimportant than the sensesbecause if I am unmindful, aperson may walk in front of mebut it is possible that I will say,“Oh, I did not notice him. I didnot see him and I could nothear him. I was unmindful.” So,mind is in the centre, and that ismore important than oursenses. The senses are more impor-
tant than the external world,and the mind is more importantbecause if the mind does notreceive, then the senses, whichare like so many doors, areuseless. Then— manasas tu parå
buddhir— there is another prin-
ciple to be traced within us, afine thing called reason, buddhi,
and what is its characteristic?The mind will say, “Oh, I shalltake that,” but buddhi says, “Oh
no. No, don’t take that, it willcause some damage. You rathertake this, it will give you bene-fit.” That faculty of selection,that reason, is a higher princi-ple in us. Because we have
senses we haveour world, buthigher is the mind
25
Then— buddher yaè paratas tu
saè— that which is superior
even to the intelligence is thesoul himself.
In this way we are to trace
out the elements. More impor-tant than the external world areour senses; more importantthan our senses is our mind;and above the mind is reasonwhich is even more important,more fine and more reliable;and— buddher yaè paratas tu
saè—there is another thing
above the buddhi, and that is our
soul. And what is its nature, itscharacteristic? It is like light.
In the Scriptures an example
has been given that on a moon-lit night there may be a cloud inthe sky which has covered themoon—but the cloud is seen by
the light of the moon. The com-
piler of the Vedas, Vyåsadeva,says the åtmå is like that illumi-
nating moon. Or, like the sun: acloud has covered the sun, butthe cloud is seen by the light ofthe sun. Similarly, the åtmå is a
point of light within us, andbecause it is in the backgroundwe can feel our mental system.If the light is withdrawn, theneverything is dead. The mentalsystem, the intelligence, thefaculty of choice, and so manychannels through which wegain knowledge from outside,will have no value if that lightis withdrawn. That light is theåtmå, a point of a ray of light,
and it is quite categoricallydifferent from all other thingshere. The soul is a particle oflight and there is a land of lightmade of souls, and in this waythere is development again:from the subjective to super-subjective, from soul to Super-soul, åtmå to Paramåtmå. Just as
in this world we find ether, air,heat, water, then earth, thenstone, and in this way there is development in materialexistence, similarly in the finer
26
The soul is like a
particle of light
and there is a
land of light
made of souls
world there is also development:
from the intelligence to the
soul, then to the Supersoul, tothe Super-supersoul… In thisway the subjective side goestowards the infinite. It is super-subjective.
Darwin in his theory of evo-
lution says that everythingcomes from matter. He saysthat even within the womb,first there is something materialwhich grows, and from thatgrowth of matter, knowledgealso gradually grows. Ingeneral terms he thinks thatconsciousness comes out ofmatter. But the followers of therevealed truth do not believe inthat. They say that conscious-ness is all in all, and everythingis floating on the ocean of con-sciousness. That is subjectiveevolution. Darwin talks ofobjective evolution, but theVedic Scriptures say thateverything comes under thecategory of subjective evolu-tion. As Bishop Berkeley, oneEuropean philosopher said, “Itis not that the mind is in theworld, but the world is in themind.” Everything is floating in the plane of consciousness.Consciousness presupposeseverything.
Darwin’s section say that in
the beginning was the fossil.But what is a fossil? A fossilmeans a particular conception,and that is a part of conscious-
ness. Therefore, we contendthat consciousness is the mostoriginal subject. Whatever youmay say to be the beginning,before that, consciousnessexisted, otherwise you cannotgive any statement aboutanything. So, the Vedic truthstates that Brahman—the all-pervading impersonal aspect ofthe Absolute—is the source of the souls, and above the soul, åtmå, is the Supersoul,
Paramåtmå. In the mundane
Everything floats
in the plane ofconsciousness.Consciousnesspresupposeseverything
27
worlds all development is in
the black side, but there is alsoa bright side: the eternal world,which exists with so manyjoyful activities—so manywaves in the ocean of blissful-ness and joy.
In this way we are to under-
stand what should be our dutyin this life, what is the specialimportance of the human life,and how to utilise that. Thereare so many religious opinions,but we seekers after truth shallhave to find a harmonisingsolution amongst them, and for
that we are to enter into somecomparative study.
It is mentioned in the Scrip-
tures that we should not changeour position very easily. Forexample a commander will sayto his army, “Don’t changeyour position. Rather, die to keep it.” But when thechance will come, he will say,“Go forward.” Similarly, theßåstra,
the Scriptures, have
told, “Wher ever you are born
according to your previouskarmma, wherever you have
taken your stand, don’t try toleave there otherwise there isthe possibility you will godown.” But at the same time,when a proper chance comes,they say, “March on towardsthe Absolute! Make furtherprogress.” So, in Bhagavad-g^tå
it is given, “Don’t easily loseyour present position acquiredby your previous action—rather, die there!” But thenagain, Kù£òa comes to say:
sarvva-dharmmån parityajya,
måm ekaì ßaraòaì vraja
“When you get the chance
of marching towards theCentre, you must do it at allcost.” This is the revolutionarymethod. There is the con-stitutional method and therevolutionary method. Therevolutionary method is to takethe risk of anything and every-
28
March on, march
forward towards
the central truth,
for this human
life gives the best
opportunity
thing and march on, march
forward towards the centraltruth, and, because this humanlife gives the best opportunity,we shall do whatever is neces-sary for that.
Only in the human life do
you practically have the use of your discrimination anddecision. If you lose this posi-tion and go to animal life orvegetable life, no one knowswhen you will again come backto be able to take independentand voluntary decision. There-fore this human life is mostimportant and you should notmisuse it only in the practices
of animal life: åhåra, nidrå, bhaya,
maithuna— to eat, to sleep, to be
under apprehension at everyminute, and to have sensepleasure, because this you willget everywhere. If you willbecome an animal or go any-where else—to become a bird, aworm, an insect, etc.—you willget all these enjoyments, but toculture about your soul, aboutreligion, about your properfunction, that chance you willnot get anywhere else otherthan in the human form of life.In the company of the saints theentire position may be dis-cussed, in this way you canmake progress in your life andsave yourself. But if havingreceived a human birth, youlose this chance, you are com-mitting suicide, or even more
than that! One commits suicidewho having received the chanceof a human birth does not try tohelp himself properly, to try forhis wholesale relief.
Don’t commit
suicide—make progressand save yourself
29
PART FIVE
Srila Guru
and
His Grace
The following essay by
Srila B.R. Sriladhar Dev-
Goswåm^ Mahåråj
was originally published in
1934 in The Harmonist.
To err is human. To err is
inevitable for all, being not per-fect. Still, no one wants toremain imperfect. There is anelement within all that is ani-mate that tends towards perfec-tion. If it were not so, we wouldfeel no want at all. Our ten-dency towards perfection is cer-tainly very weak and limited;otherwise we could attain the
goal at once. Our limited capac-ity and tendency for perfectionmakes room for the guide orGuru.
The imperfect is not so if it is
not in need of help, and thatalso from beyond itself. Theperfect is not perfect if He can-not assert Himself or help oth-ers, and that too, of His ownaccord. So the guidance to per-fection or Absolute Truth isnecessarily a function of theAbsolute Himself, and thedivine agent through whomthis function manifests is Srila
Guru or the divine guide.
For a seeker of the Absolute
Truth, submission to the Guru
is unavoidable. A class ofthinkers believes, however, thatwhen scientific research is pos-sible, why cannot higher spiri-tual knowledge also be evolvedfrom within? Such people areignorant of the most essentialnature of absolute Knowledge,that He alone is the AbsoluteSubject and all else includingourselves constitutionally standonly as an object to His omni-scient vision. It is impossible forthe eye to see the mind; it canhave some connection with themind only when the latter caresto mind it. In a similar way, ourconnection with absoluteknowledge depends mainly onHis sweet will. We must solely
30
depend on His agent, or the
spiritual master, through whomHe likes to distribute Himself.
Our human society with its
finest culture forms but aninfinitesimal part of the dynam-ic absolute. How, except by thedirect and positive method ofrevelation, dare we hope tocomprehend or evolve any con-ception of the supernaturalknowledge of the uncondi-tioned infinite? All intellectualgiants prove themselves butpygmies before the absoluteomniscient omnipotence whoreserves the right to giveHimself away through His ownagents alone.
To our best knowledge and
sincerity, however, we shouldsee not to submit to a falseagent. Here of course, we can’thelp ourselves very much;because in our present state weare mainly guided by our previ-ous saìskåra or acquired
nature. “Birds of the samefeather flock together.” Yet,although we are generally over-powered by habit, there is stillthe possibility of free choice toa certain extent, specially in thehuman species, otherwise cor-rection becomes impossible,and punishment merevengeance. Reality can assertitself. Light does not requiredarkness for its positive proof.The sun by itself can establishits supremacy over all other
lights. Before an open and unbi-ased eye, the sad Guru (real
guide) shines above all profes-sors of phenomenon.
Srila Guru manifests himself
mainly in a twofold way — asthe director from within andthe preceptor from without.Both functions of the absolutehelp an individual soul — a dis-ciple — to reach the absolutegoal. In our fallen state we can-not catch the proper directionof the inner guide, so the merci-ful manifestation of the precep-tor without is our sole help andhope. But at the same time it is
31
The real guide
shines above allprofessors of
phenomenon
only by the grace of the Guru
within that we can recognizethe real preceptor without andsubmit to his holy feet.
A bona fide disciple must
always remain fully awake tothe fact that his highest spiritu-al fortune is but a graciousgrant from the Absolute Lord,and not a matter of right to bedemanded or fought out.Constitutionally, we areequipped only to be properrecipients of God’s favour. Inthis connection it should beclearly understood that an indi-vidual soul can never be sub-stantially the same as theAbsolute Person. Not even in
his liberated or fully realizedcondition can an individualsoul be one with Godhead. Themisconception of one-ness hasbeen introduced from the sloth-ful non-discrimination of theAbsolute Personality from theluminous orb around His eter-nal, spiritual, and blissfulhome. In fact, an individualsoul constitutes only a part of aparticular power of intermedi-ate value of the Supreme Lord,and as such he is capable ofbeing converted from bothsides. He differs from theAbsolute Entity both in quanti-ty and quality, and is merely adependent entity on the abso-lute. In other words, theAbsolute Lord Kù£òa is themaster, and an individual j^va
soul is His constitutional subor-dinate or servant.
Such a relationship is con-
stant and really wholesome forthe j^va. The apprehension of
slavery does not arise becauseof his free choice and immensepositive gain. The freedom andindividuality of the j^vaare not
only unharmed by surrender tothe Absolute Good, but theyreally thrive in Him alone.Individual freedom and interestare the part and parcel of thosewho are of the absolute, and sothey are quite at home there, asa fish is at home in water or an
32
The constant and
really wholesome
relationship for
the soul
animal in a healthy atmosphere.
But the freedom as well as allother qualities of the SupremePersonality are unlimited andtranscendental, and so only bytheir partial functions they har-monize all relative entities.
Srila Guru is not exclusively the
same as the Supreme LordHimself, but he fully representsthe essence of the whole normalpotency and embodies the mostcomprehensive and excellentservice and favour of the Lord.As he is the fittest servitor of theLord, he is empowered by theLord to reinstate all misguidedsouls to their best interest. So,Guru is the divine messenger of
immortal hope and joy in thismortal and miserable world.His advent is the most auspi-cious and happy event to thesuffering animation, and can becompared to the rising of themorning star that can guide thetraveller lost in the desert. Agentle touch of Srila Guru’s merci-
ful hand can wipe off the inces-sant tears from all weepingeyes. A patriot or philanthropistmakes the problem only worsein his frantic and futile attemptto alleviate the deep-rootedpain of a suffering soul, as anignorant doctor does in eagerlyhandling an unfortunatepatient. Oh the day when thispoor soul realizes the causelessgrace of Srila Gurudeva.
Abbreviations
Bg.: — Srilamad Bhagavad-g^tå
Bhå: — Srilamad-BhågavatamSrila Guru’s hand
can wipe off theincessant tearsfrom all weeping eyes
33
Publications
(A selection of English
editions)
a)  By and about Srila B.R.
Sriladhar Dev-Goswåm^:
Centenary Anthology
Exclusive GuardianshipGolden Volcano of Divine LoveHoly EngagementHome ComfortLoving Search for the Lost ServantSearch for Srila Kù£òa
l
Sermons of the Guardian of Devotion Sri Gaudiya Darshan (Periodical from
)
Srila-Srila Prapanna-j^vanåmùtam
—(Positive
and Progressive Immortality)
Srila Guru Mahåråj — His Divine
Pastimes & Precepts in Brief
Srilamad Bhagavad-g^tå— (The Hidden
Treasure of the Sweet Absolute)
Subjective Evolution —(The Play of the
Sweet Absolute)b)  By and about Srila B.S.
Govinda Dev-Goswåm^:
Dignity of the Divine Servitor
Divine GuidanceGolden ReflectionsDivine Message of the DevoteesThe Benedictine Tree of DivineAspirationThe Divine Servitor
c)  Various (in English):
Relative Worlds (by Srila Bhaktisiddhånta
Saraswat^ ëhåkur)
Srila Brahmå-saìhitå (Bengali/English)
Srila Chaitanya Mahåprabhu —His Life &
Precepts   (by Srila Bhaktivinod ëhåkur)
Srila Chaitanya Saraswat^ —(The Voice of
Srila Chaitanyadev) #1
Srila Chaitanya Saraswat^— #2 (Colour)
And: Bengali, Gujurati, Hindi,
Czech, German, Hungarian, Italian, Oriyan, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish…
(Enquiries welcome)Kù£òa said: “Why did you stay away? Why have you been
living away from home for so long? How was it possible foryou? How could you bear My separation? You left Me, and youhave been passing lives after lives without Me. Still I know whattrouble you took to return to Me. You searched for Meeverywhere, and went to beg from house to house, and youwere chastised by many, ridiculed by many, and you shed tearsfor Me. I know all these things. I was with you. And now, aftergreat trouble, you have again come back to Me.”
—“Loving Search for the Lost Servant”
by Srila B.R. Sriladhar Dev-Goswåm^ Mahåråj
Please consider:
“The outer nature cannot do as much harm to us as our
inner nature can do in its apathy to collect more wealth forthe inner existence: the man within.”
“The nature of the progressive substance is eternal
existence, knowledge, and beauty. The one harmonisingorganic whole contains all similarities and differences, heldinconceivably in the hand of the Absolute. And there is noanarchy in the absolute power. Nonetheless, mercy isfound to be above justice. Above judiciousness, thesupreme position is held by love, sympathy, and beauty: ‘Iam the absolute power, but I am friendly to you all.Knowing this, you need never fear (Srilamad Bhagavad-gita
5.29).’ This revelation relieves us of all apprehension: we
are not victims of a chaotic environment, but it is judicious,considerate—and the ultimate dispenser is our friend.”
—“Positive and Progressive Immortality”
by Swami B.R. Sridhar
We have much food for the thoughtful.
You are humbly invited, without any
obligation, to write, enquire, and participate
for your own inner fulfilment
of this valuable life.
,   Kolerganj,   P.O.Nabadwip,
District Nadia,   W.Bengal,   PIN 741302,   INDIA. You are invited to contact:
Thought provoking, with clear,
practical guidance for livinglife more fully each day.
It makes the prospect of
becoming joyfully immortal, a reality.
Most readable… …it gives
hope and strength to all.
, Kolerganj,
P.O. Nabadwip, District Nadia, PIN 741302, W.B., India