ALLGLORIES TO ßR^GURU AND GAUR å§GA
The Search
For
ßrÈ Krishna
Reality The Beautiful
lÈlÅ premˆÅ priyÅdhikya˜
mÅdhurya˜ veˆu-rËpayoÓity asÅdhÅraˆa˜ prokta˜govindasya catu›Êayam
Krishna has four superexcellent qualities: His won-
derful pastimes, His wonderful associates like thegopÈs, who are very dear to Him, His sweet beauty, and
the sweet vibration of His flute.
(Chaitanya-caritÅmÂta Madhya-lÈlÅ 23.84 )
The Search
For
ßrÈ Krishna
Reality The Beautiful
Through His holy name, transcendental sound
preached and practiced by ßrÈ Chaitanyadeva,
who is none other than RÅdhÅ and Govinda
combined — and propagated by
ßrÈla BhaktisiddhÅnta SaraswatÈ †hÅkur
HIS DIVINE GRACE
SRILA BHAKTI RAKSAK
SRIDHAR DEV-GOSWAMI
MAHARAJ
ßrÈ Chaitanya SÅraswat MaÊh
© 1989 Sri Chaitanya Sarawat Math
All rights reserved by the Successor President-acharya
, Kolegranj,
P .O. Box Nabadwip, Dist. Nadia, W . Bengal Pin 741302,
India
First Printing 1983 5,000 copies
Second Printing 1983   5.000 copies
Third Printing  1986   3,000 copies
Fourth Printing  1988   5,000 copies
published by
Guardian of Devotion Press
Fifth Printing 2000  2,500 copies
Published by
Ananta Printing & Publishing
2827 S. Rodeo Gulch Rd. #3, Soquel, California 95073
(831) 464-9045  email: ananta@ananta-press.com
Special thanks to the following devotees for their help with
this current edition: Swami B.P . Janardan, Swami B.C.Parvat, Navadwip Prabhu, Sarvabhavana Prabhu, AnantaKrishna Prabhu, Tilak devi dasi, Dayal Dulal Prabhu.
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21Krishna Consciousness: Love and Beauty . . . . . . . 25Saints, Scriptures, and Gurus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41Fossilism vs. Subjective Evolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . 57Origin of the Soul  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65Knowledge above Mortality  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71Six Philosophies of India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87Beyond Christianity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91Levels of God Realization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113The Krishna Conception  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127The Hare Krishna Mantra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133Service of the Holy Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149Nectar of the Holy Name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159Reality the Beautiful  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
Explanation of Math Logo  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203Address List of Centers Worldwide . . . . . . . . . . . 205Publications Available  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .209
President-åchÅrya ßrÈ Chaitanya SÅraswat MaÊh
ßrÈla Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-GoswÅmÈ MahÅrÅj
Founder-åchÅrya ßrÈ Chaitanya SÅraswat MaÊh
ßrÈla Bhakti Rak›ak ßrÈdhar Dev-GoswÅmÈ MahÅrÅj
ßrÈla BhaktisiddhÅnta SaraswatÈ †hÅkur
ßrÈla Gaura KiÍora DÅsa BÅbÅjÈ MahÅrÅj
ßrÈla Bhaktivinoda †hÅkur
FOREWORD
by
ßrÈla Bhaktivinoda †hÅkur
Nineteenth Century Founder of the Krishna
Consciousness Movement
'
We love to read a book which we have never read
before. We are anxious to gather whatever infor-
mation is contained in it, and with such acquirementour curiosity stops. This mode of study prevails amongst
11“Party spirit—that great enemy of truth—will always baffle the
attempt of the inquirer who tries to gather truth from the religiousworks of his nation and will make him believe that the AbsoluteTruth is nowhere except in his old religious book.”
ßrÈla Bhaktivinoda †hÅkur
a great number of readers who are great men in their
own estimation as well as in the estimation of those whoare of their own stamp. In fact, most readers are mere re-positories of facts and statements made by other people.But this is not study. The student is to read the factswith a view to create, and not with the object of fruit-less retention. Students, like satellites, should reflectwhatever light they receive from authors, and notimprison the facts and thoughts just as the magistratesimprison the convicts in the jail!
Thought is progressive. The author’s thought must
have progress in the reader in the shape of correction ordevelopment. He is the best critic who can show thefurther development of an old thought; but a mere de-nouncer is the enemy of progress, and consequently ofnature. Progress certainly is the law of nature, andthere must be corrections and developments with theprogress of time. But progress means going further or ris-ing higher. The shallow critic and the fruitless reader arethe two great enemies of progress. We must shun them.
The true critic, on the other hand, advises us to
preserve what we have already obtained, and to adjustour race from that point where we have arrived in theheat of our progress. He will never advise us to go backto the point whence we started, as he fully knows thatin that case there will be a fruitless loss of our valuabletime and labor. He will direct the adjustment of theangle of our race at the point where we are.12 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
This is also the characteristic of the useful student.
He will read an old author and will find out his exactposition in the progress of thought. He will never pro-pose to burn a book on the ground that it containsthoughts which are useless. No thought is useless.Thoughts are means by which we attain our objects.The reader who denounces a bad thought does notknow that a bad road is even capable of improvementand conversion into a good one. One thought is a roadleading to another. Thus, the reader will find that onethought, which is the object today, will be the means ofa further object tomorrow. Thoughts will necessarilycontinue to be an endless series of means and objects inthe progress of humanity.
The great reformers will always assert that they have
come out not to destroy the old law, but to fulfill it.
Valmiki, VyÅsa, Plato, Jesus, Mohammed, Confucius,and Chaitanya MahÅprabhu assert the fact eitherexpressly or by their conduct.
Our critic, however, may nobly tell us that a reformer
like VyÅsa, unless purely explained, may lead thou-sands of men into great trouble in time to come. Butdear critic! Study the history of ages and countries!
Where have you found the philosopher and reformerfully understood by the people? The popular religionis fear of God, and not the pure spiritual love whichPlato, VyÅsa, Jesus, and Chaitanya taught to their respec-tive peoples! Whether you give the absolute religionFOREWORD 13
in figures or simple expressions, or teach them by means
of books or oral speeches, the ignorant and the thought-less must degrade it.
It is indeed very easy to tell, and swift to hear, that
Absolute Truth has such an affinity with the humansoul that it comes through as if intuitively, and thatno exertion is necessary to teach the precepts of truereligion, but this is a deceptive idea. It may be true ofethics and of the alphabet of religion, but not of thehighest form of faith, which requires an exalted soul tounderstand. All higher truths, though intuitive, requireprevious education in the simpler ones. That religion isthe purest which gives us the purest idea of God. Howthen is it possible that the ignorant will ever obtainthe absolute religion, as long as they are ignorant?
So we are not to scandalize the Savior of Jerusalem
or the Savior of Nadia for these subsequent evils.Luthers, instead of critics, are what we want for thecorrection of those evils by the true interpretation of theoriginal precepts.
God gives us truth as He gave it to VyÅsa, when
we earnestly seek for it. Truth is eternal and inex-haustable. The soul receives a revelation when it isanxious for it. The souls of the great thinkers of thebygone ages, who now live spiritually, often approachour inquiring spirit and assist it in its development.Thus, VyÅsa was assisted by NÅrada and BrahmÅ. Our14 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
ÍÅstras , or in other words, books of thought, do not
contain all that we could get from the infinite Father.No book is without its errors. God’s revelation isAbsolute Truth, but it is scarcely received and pre-served in its natural purity. We have been advised inthe ßrÈmad-BhÅgavatam (11.14.3) to believe that truth
when revealed is absolute, but it gets the tincture of thenature of the receiver in course of time, and is con-verted into error by continual exchange of hands fromage to age. New revelations, therefore, are continu-ally necessary in order to keep truth in its originalpurity. We are thus warned to be careful in our studiesof old authors, however wise they are reputed to be.Here, we have full liberty to reject the wrong idea,which is not sanctioned by the peace of conscience.
VyÅsa was not satisfied with what he collected in the
Vedas, arranged in the PurÅˆas, and composed in the
MahÅbhÅrata. The peace of his conscience did not sanc-
tion his labors. It told him from inside, “No, VyÅsa!You can’t rest contented with the erroneous picture oftruth which was necessarily presented to you by thesages of bygone days! You must yourself knock at thedoor of the inexhaustible store of truth from whichthe former sages drew their wealth. Go! Go up to thefountainhead of truth, where no pilgrim meets withdisappointment of any kind. VyÅsa did it and obtainedwhat he wanted. We have all been advised to do so.FOREWORD 15
Liberty then, is the principle which we must consider
as the most valuable gift of God. We must not allowourselves to be led by those who lived and thoughtbefore us. We must think for ourselves and try to get fur-ther truths, which are still undiscovered. In the ßrÈmad
BhÅgavatam (11.21.23) we have been advised to take
the spirit of the ÍÅstras , and not the words. The
BhÅgavata is therefore a religion of liberty, unmixed
truth, and absolute love.
The other characteristic is progress. Liberty cer-
tainly is the father of all progress. Holy liberty is thecause of progress upwards and upwards in eternity andendless activity of love. Liberty misused causes degra-dation, and the Vai›ˆava must always carefully use this
high and beautiful gift of God.
The spirit of this text goes far to honor all great re-
formers and teachers who lived and will live in othercountries. The Vai›ˆava is ready to honor all men with-
out distinction of caste, because they are filled withthe energy of God. See how universal is the religion ofthe BhÅgavata. It is not intended for a certain class of
Hindus alone, but it is a gift to man at large, in what-ever country he is born, and in whatever society he isbred. In short, Vai›ˆavism is the Absolute Love binding
all men together into the infinite unconditioned andabsolute God. May peace reign forever in the wholeuniverse in the continual development of its purity by16 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
the exertion of the future heroes, who will be blessed
according to the promise of the BhÅgavata with powers
from the Almighty Father, the Creator, Preserver, andthe Annihilator of all things in Heaven and Earth.
—From an English lecture delivered in 1869, at
Dinajpur, West Bengal.FOREWORD 17
ßrÈla Bhaktivedanta SwÅmÈ PrabhupÅd and ßrÈla SrÈdhar MahÅrÅj
sharing the vyÅsÅsana, the seat of VyÅsa offered to the bona fide
spiritual master. [ßrÈla Govinda MahÅrÅj (near the microphone)is speaking.]
by
ßrÈla Bhaktivedanta SwÅmÈ PrabhupÅd
Founder-åchÅrya of the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness
We are very fortunate to hear His Divine Grace,
Om Vi›ˆupÅda Paramaha˜sa Parivrajak åchÅrya
Bhakti Rak›ak ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj. By age and by experi-ence, in both ways, he is senior to me. I was fortunate tohave his association since a long time, since perhaps1930. At that time he had not accepted sannyÅs, but had
just left home. He went to preach in Allahabad, and onthat auspicious occasion we were connected.
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj lived in my house for many years, so
naturally we had very intimate talks. He has such highrealizations of Krishna that one would faint to hearthem. He was always my good advisor, and I took hisadvice very seriously because from the very beginning Iknew that he was a pure devotee of Krishna. So, Iwanted to associate with him. Krishna and PrabhupÅd,ßrÈla BhaktisiddhÅnta Saraswati †hÅkur, liked him toprepare me. Our relationship is very intimate.
After the breakdown of our spiritual master’s institu-
tion I wanted to organize another institution making
19PREFACE
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj the head. ßrÈla BhaktisiddhÅnta
Saraswati †hÅkur told me that ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj is oneof the finest preachers of Krishna consciousness in theworld, so I wanted to take him everywhere. This was myearnest desire. But since he could not go around theworld and preach, at least the people of the worldshould come to hear from him.
For spiritual advancement of life we must go to
someone who is actually practicing spiritual life. So ifone is actually serious to take instructions from a Íik›a
guru, or instructing spiritual master, I can refer him to
one who is the most competent of all my Godbrothers.This is B.R. ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj. I consider ßrÈdharMahÅrÅj to be even my Íik›a guru , so what to speak of
the benefit that others can have from his association.20 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
Everyone is searching for rasa, pleasure. The status of
rasa is the highest. As persons we have our subjec-
tive existence, but rasa, pleasure, has His supersubjec-
tive existence. He is a person. He is akhila rasÅmÂta-
mËrtiÓ : the reservoir of all pleasure. He is Krishna. Rasa
is Krishna. There cannot be rasa in any other place
but Krishna. He is the fountainhead of all differenttypes of rasa. So, by the nature of our constitution we
have to search after Krishna.
In the Brahma-sËtra it is said, “Inquire after the
supreme cause of this world. Search!” From where haseverything come? How is everything maintaining its ex-istence? By whom? And ultimately, where does every-thing enter after death? That is brahma, spirit, the most
fundamental plane from where everything springs up,remains, and ultimately enters.
Where is brahma ? The Brahma-sËtra advises us to
inquire after the prime cause, the biggest, the all-accom-modating. But ßrÈ Chaitanya MahÅprabhu replacedthat, ßrÈmad-BhÅgavatam replaced that with KÂ›ˆÅnusan-
dhÅna : the search for ßrÈ Krishna.
BrahmÅ-jijñÅsÅ , the search for spirit, is a dry thing.
That is only the exercise of your thinking faculty, ajugglery of reason. Leave that behind. Begin the search
21INTRODUCTION
for ßrÈ Krishna and quench the thirst of your heart.
Rasa jijñÅsÅ, raso vai saÓ . The things acquired by your
reason won’t satisfy you. JñÅna , knowledge, cannot
really quench your thirst, so instead of brahma-jijñÅsÅ
accept KÂ›ˆÅnusandhÅna and begin the search for ßrÈ
Krishna.
Where is Krishna? Our real want will be satisfied only
by getting the service of Krishna; not by anything else. Wewant to satisfy the innermost demands of our hearts. Wedon’t care to know where we are or what is controllingeverything, but we really want to quench our thirst forrasa, for mÅdhurya, for sweetness. We must search neither
for knowledge nor for the controller of this world; wemust search after rasa,Ånandam , after beauty and charm.
ßrÈ Chaitanya MahÅprabhu and ßrÈmad-BhÅgavatam
have taught us what to beg for, what to pray for, whatto want. They have taught us, “If you beg, beg forKrishna, not for anything else.” So, the fate of theVai›ˆavas , the students of the BhÅgavata and the fol-
lowers of MahÅprabhu, is sealed in the search for ßrÈKrishna. We want nothing else but Krishna.
The Vedas say, sÂˆvantu viÍve amÂtasya putrÅÓ : “O,
you sons of nectar, sons of the nectarine ocean sea:please listen to me. You were born in nectar; you wereborn to taste nectar, and you must not allow yourselvesto be satisfied by anything but nectar. So, however mis-guided you may be for the time being, awake! Arise!Search for that nectar, that satisfaction.” The Vedas tell22 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
us, “O˜!”O˜means a big “Yes!” “What you are search-
ing for, that is! Don’t be disappointed.” The Vedas say
that the object of our inner search exists. The com-mon search of all your hearts is existing, and your thirst
will be quenched. By your constitution you are meant for
that and you deserve that, so don’t be afraid; don’t becowed down. It is already given in your being. And youcan never be satisfied with anything else. So prepareyourself, after your long search, to receive that longmissing nectar in its full form and quality. Awake! Arise!Search for your fortune and you cannot but have that.It is your birthright. It is the wealth of your own soul. Itcannot but be within you. You have no other business,no other engagement but KÂ›ˆÅnusandhÅna, the Search
for ßrÈ Krishna: Reality the Beautiful.INTRODUCTION 23
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the
Bengali poet Hemachandra wrote, “There are so
many countries rising in prominence: this land, thatland.  Japan is a very small country, but it is rising likethe sun. Only India is under eternal slumber.” When hementioned the other part of the world, he said,“America is rising forcefully, as if he is coming to swal-low the whole world. Sometimes he is shouting as ifwith a war cry, and the whole world is shivering. Hisenthusiasm is so intense and great that he wants tosnatch the world from the solar system, and give it anew shape, a new molding.” America has been men-tioned in this way by Hemachandra. In the same way,Bhaktivedanta SwÅmÈ MahÅrÅj came to give the worlda new shape through Krishna consciousness. He oncesaid, “We must go there and build it in a new way—with Krishna consciousness.”
What is Krishna consciousness? Krishna consciousness
means real love and beauty. Real love and beauty mustpredominate; not selfishness, or exploitation. Generally,whenever we see beauty, we think that beauty is to be
25KRISHNA
CONSCIOUSNESS :
LOVE AND BEAUTY
exploited, but actually, beauty is the exploiter, beauty is
the master, and beauty is the controlling principle.
And what is love? Love means sacrifice for others.
We should not think that sacrifice is to be exploited byus. Who is to be the recipient of sacrifice? Is it ourparty? No. We are in the group of those who sacrificethemselves: the predominated negative party,MahÅbhÅva’s party. The underlying principle of love issacrifice, but sacrifice for whom? And who is the ben-eficiary? Love is the beneficiary. Everyone should con-tribute to the center, but no one should draw energyfrom there. “Die to live.” With this spirit we shouldcombine and work for real love and beauty.
B
ANNER OF LOVE
And beauty will be victorious in the world. Love
will be victorious in the world. We will sacrifice every-thing to see that the banner of divine love will flutterall over the world, for a particle of that divine lovewill be able to keep peace and distribute peace in alldirections. Just as fighting soldiers dedicate everything,and give their lives so their countrymen will benefit inthe future, we should sacrifice our lives and work tobring real peace for everyone.
In VÂndÅvana, the land of Krishna, the standard of
sacrifice is unlimited. Devotees there are willing to riskeverything for Krishna. If that principle of sacrifice isenthroned, then peace will automatically follow.26 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
Krishna consciousness should be enthroned above all
other conceptions. All other conceptions are meantto be subservient to Krishna consciousness. The ideal ofVÂndÅvana, Krishna’s abode, is above all other ideals. Intheistic comparison, the conception of ßrÈ ChaitanyaMahÅprabhu’s lÈlÅ is above all other conceptions. There,
theism reaches its zenith. That is our highest goal, andstep by step, that should be explained, thought out,accepted, and preached.
A
TOMIC DEATH
Without this, what sort of benefit are you expecting
from your present engagement? Only death is awaitingyou. You are so proud of this scientific civilization andare boasting so much, but death is awaiting you whetherit is atomic death or natural death. You can’t crossdeath. One English poet has written:
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gaveAwaits alike the inevitable hour:The paths of glory lead but to the grave
—Thomas Gray’s  Elegy in a Country Churchyard
You do not care to solve the greatest danger. You say
that you are big thinkers, that you are great men, andthat you should command the respect of society, but thegeneral inevitable problem for every atom here is death.What is your contribution for solving the greatest dan-ger which is waiting to devour everyone—scientist,KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 27
insect, or virus? What is your solution to death? Have
you taken any steps to solve that universal danger?What you are doing at present is exploitation, and youare encouraging a lower life as a reaction. You areexploiting nature, and everyone who is deriving thebenefits will have to pay to the farthing with interest.
“For every action there is an equal and opposite
reaction.” This is your statement, but what have youdone to solve that? You are endangering the fate ofthe world by your fascinating proposals of apparentcomfort. What is this? You are avoiding the greatestinevitable danger, so your life is a useless malengage-ment. In one sense, you are traitors to society. Comewith courage to face and solve the real problem, thecommon problem, and the most dangerous problem;otherwise you should leave the field and go away. Leaveit to us. We shall prove that the world is an abode ofperfect happiness: (viÍva˜ pËrˆa sukhÅyate) .
D
IVEDEEP INTO REALITY
But to understand this, you will have to dive deep,
not into the plane of body and mind, but into theplane of soul. You will have to dive deep into the real-ity that is within us. It is not a foreign thing to beacquired by loan, but the soul is within everyone, eventhe insects and the trees. So, we have to rise to theplane of soul. Eliminate both your physical and mentalencasements and find out your own self. There you28 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
will find the key, the clue to the proper world where life
is worth living.
The solution is there; a hint is given by many mahÅ-
janas, by great saints in every religious sect to some
extent, but our claim is that India has given the high-est conception of the spiritual world in the Bhagavad-
gÈtÅ and ßrÈmad-BhÅgavatam . So, we challenge all of
you: we are not imaginationists; we are most practicalthinkers. We don’t avoid any great problem by saying,“Oh, it can’t be solved.” We do not belong to the partythat wants to easily take prestige and fame. We don’twant to classify ourselves with those hoaxing people.Come and see whether the plane of reality can be
A sixteenth century painting of ßrÈ Chaitanya MahÅprabhu and
His associates discussing ßrÈmad-BhÅgavatam .KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 29
found. You are not required to spend any less energy in
your campaign, so take our program; try it and see.
Where are you? Who are you? What is the real
nature of the world? In the Koran, in the Bible, and in
the Vedas, and in every other scripture, a hope and
hint has been given about the life of reality. Is this alla hoax? What charm have the materialists given? Thatcharm is only for the self-deceivers, and that is draggingthem into the country of loan and debt, the land where“Every action has an equal and opposite reaction.”So, a divine civilization should be drawn out into thisplane. We have to try the path that has been sug-gested by the great saints and scriptures. It is not unrea-sonable. It is not madness. Come, reason can also beapplied there.
ßrÈ Chaitanya MahÅprabhu gave a solution to all
our problems with an allegorical example. He said,“We see that you are poor, but there is a happy solution.Your wealth is underground in your own room: just tryto unearth it. Don’t approach it from the southern side,the give-and-take method of karma, for then whatever
you do will bring some reaction that will capture anddisturb you, and you will have no time to reach theproper solution. If you approach that hidden wealthfrom the western side, through the yoga system, by
manipulating the subtle forces of nature to attain super-natural mystic power, that will enchant you and takeyour attention away from the desired goal. Your own30T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
activity in the wrong direction will create obstacles to
your achievement.
THESAMåDHI PHANTOM
“If you approach the treasure from the north, the side
of that grand brahmÅsmi , the impersonal conception,
with the help of misinterpreted Vedantic logic, then youwill enter into eternal samÅdhi , that great phantom
will swallow you up, your existence will be nowhere,and who will come to enjoy the peace of getting thewealth? Only if you approach from the eastern side,with the help of devotion, will you get the wealth eas-ily. That is the direction of the sunrise, the light givingdirection. And that light is not prepared by our ownhand; that light is from the source of all light: therevealed truth. It is extended from the quarter which isunknown to us. That light is revealed knowledge, bhakti,
the path of devotion.
Adopt that path in your search for the real wealth
within you, and easily you will find your own self,which is most wonderful (ÅÍcaryavat paÍyati kaÍcid enam).
Discovering that your own self is so wonderful, youwill be ashamed, thinking, “How could I have beencarried away by the charm of this mundane world? I amthe soul. How was it possible for mÅyÅ to have such
enchanting power over me that my own self, which isso wonderful and so valuable, was drawn into illusion?The peace which is within me has been greatly admiredKRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 31
by the spiritual stalwarts, but I have come in connection
with mortal and nasty, rotten things. How? It is mostwonderful, but I was deceived.”
Then from ÅtmÅ to ParamÅtmÅ, from soul to
Supersoul, then from VÅsudeva to NÅrÅyaˆa, and thenfrom NÅrÅyaˆa to Krishna, the progressive under-standing in God realization is not unscientific; it isreally scientific. This is vijñÅna, scientific knowledge:
jñÅna˜ te ’ha˜ sa-vijñÅnam
ida˜ vak›yÅmy aÍe›ataÓyaj jñÅtvÅ neha bhËyo ’nyajjñÅtavyam avaÍi›yate
In the Bhagavad-gÈtÅ (7.2) Krishna says, “Arjuna,
now I shall explain to you scientific knowledge notonly about the soul, but also about its potency. Themind, the senses, and the modes of nature are all non-
ÅtmÅ, or material. There is a direct and indirect
approach towards reality which I shall now explain toyou. Please listen attentively to Me: jñÅna˜ te’ ham sa-
vijñÅnam. What is this? There is Myself and My potency,
and the jÈva, the living entity, is the marginal potency
which is filling up all these material worlds.” If thejÈva-Íakti, the spiritual potency, were withdrawn, then
everything would be stone, and who would care forexploitation? All this fighting tendency, this tendencyfor exploitation would stop if the marginal potency,the jÈva, were withdrawn from matter. Everything would32T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
be dead. The soul has en tered into this material con-
sciousness and has made it a moving thing. Youshould understand this properly, in a scientific way.We are not lacking in our ability to give you a sci-entific explanation.
P
LANE OF SELF-DECEPTION
A higher conception of the finer world is here. It is
real, and where you are trying your utmost to make astand, the place that you consider real is unreal.
yÅ niÍÅ sarva-bhËtÅnÅ˜
tasyÅ˜ jÅgarti sa˜yamÈyasyÅ˜ jÅgrati bhËtÅni sÅ niÍÅ paÍyato muneÓ
—Bhagavad-gÈtÅ (2.69)
“You are asleep to your real self-interest and the
real truth, while you are awake in the plane of self-deception.” We must establish ourselves in the plane ofreality, and try our best to extend it to others.
And to preach means this: “I sincerely have faith in
Krishna consciousness and relish it to the utmost. Ifind that my future prospect is also here. Because Ifeel that it is very tasteful, useful, and wholesome, Ihave come to distribute it to you, my friends. Weshould guide our lives according to the principles ofKrishna consciousness as taught by the spiritual mas-ter. Take it, and you will be successful in fulfilling thegoal of your life.”KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 33
RASA, HAPPINESS , ECSTASY
In this way, we have to approach everyone with
God consciousness, Krishna consciousness. We mustshow how God consciousness ultimately merges inKrishna consciousness. We have to prove dexterously,step by step, that Krishna is the reservoir of all pleasure(akhila rasÅmÂta mËrtiÓ). What is Krishna conscious-
ness? RËpa GoswÅmÈ has given a scientific definition.Rasa, pleasure, cannot be avoided. We are all after
rasa. Everyone, every unit, even the smallest unit of the
world is always hankering after rasa, happiness, ecstasy,
and all possible phases of rasa are personified in Krishna.
Try to understand how it is. What is rasa? What is its
nature? How can a comparison in rasa be drawn? In
this way, step by step, you will have to come to theKrishna conception of Godhead. It is not a tale from theancient Indian scriptures. Krishna is not the object ofa tale, but fact. You have to come out and face thatliving fact, that reality. We shall try our best to show youhow it can be a fact. Krishna is a fact. He is a reality, andreality is for itself.
You have to pay for the goal. You must “Die to
live,” and in this way you will feel that it is not ahoax. When you progress on the path, you will feel it(bhaktiÓ pareÍÅnubhavo viraktir anyatra ca). With every
step forward, you will feel these three things: satis-faction, nourishment, and the eradication of yourhunger. Your hankering in general will be diminished.34T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
Generally, we feel, “I want this, I want that, I want
everything; still I have not satisfied my hunger.” Butyou will feel that your hunger is being appeased asyou progress in Krishna consciousness, and what youpreviously thought would give you relief will takeleave from you automatically. Their trade won’t con-tinue; they will all withdraw, your natural inclinationfor spiritual advancement will automatically increase,and you will find acceleration in your progress. “Youwill practically feel these three things, so come andtake what we say.” In this way, you have to approachone and all, leaving the result to the Lord.
FRUITS OF ENERGY
We are only agents, and we are working because
He has ordered us, so we must remember what is bhakti,
what is devotion proper. Whatever I do, the wage Iearn must not come to me; I am only an agent. Thebenefit should go to the proprietor, to my master,Krishna. We should move with this idea, and that willbe bhakti proper. Otherwise, we will be engaged in
karma-kÅnda : fruit-hunting. I want to enjoy the result of
karma for myself, but the result should go to my master.
I am His servant, and I am working under His order. Iam His slave; I am not the proprietor. I am not theproper person to be the recipient of the fruits of energy.The master of energy is the Supreme Lord, and all theproducts of energy should go to Him. It must not beKRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 35
tampered with on the way. This should be the attitude
of every worker. Then it will be bhakti proper. We are
not the recipients; He is the recipient. We must alwaysbe conscious that the only beneficiary is He. Only thenare we devotees. We are not the beneficiaries, but self-less workers. It is said in the Bhagavad-gÈtÅ (2.47):
karmaˆy evÅdhikÅras te
mÅ phale›u kadÅcanamÅ karma-phala-hetur bhËrmÅ te sa⁄go ’stv akarmaˆi
“You have a right to perform your duty, but you
have no right to enjoy the fruits of your work.” This isa great warning. Krishna says, “Do not think thatbecause you are not the beneficiary of the fruits ofyour action, you have no reason to take so much trou-ble to work—never.” That is the most heinous curse,to think that because I am not the beneficiary, I am notgoing to work. Even selfless activity is also of a lowerorder. Rather we must perform godly activity for thesatisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is bhakti, or
devotion. And there is also a gradation in bhakti : there
is a big division between vidhi-bhakti and rÅga-bhakti,
calculative devotion and spontaneous devotion.
A
UTOCRAT , DESPOT , ANDLIAR
God is not a constitutional king, but He is an auto-
crat. To work for an autocrat is the highest concep-tion of sacrifice. What degree of selflessness and courage36T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
is required to work for an autocrat, a despot, a liar who
is up to anything? Not only that, His normal positionis such. It is not a temporary temperament, but Hiseternal inner nature. Krishna is an autocrat becauselaw emanates from Him. An autocrat is above law.When there are many, there is a need for law; whenthere is only one, there is no need for law. Krishna is adespot, but He is absolute good. If there is any check inHis despotism, the world will be the loser. Goodnessmust have its full flow. Is that bad? Can there be anyobjection to this? Goodness must have its freedom toflow anywhere and everywhere. If we say that God isabsolute good, then what do we lose by giving Himautocracy? Should autocracy be with the ignorant andthe fools? No. The absolute good must have full autoc-racy. Not that law will go to bind His hands. Then wewill be losers. And Krishna is a liar, to entice us, becausewe cannot understand the whole truth. So to entice usto gradually come to the truth, He has become a liar.
The first thing to understand is that He is all good-
ness, so everything emanating from Him cannot but begood. Any defect is on our side. We are encroachers. Heis not an encroacher. But He shows this as His play, lÈlÅ.
Everything belongs to Him, so there is no lying. WhenHe says, “Let there be light,” there was light: “Let therebe water,” there was water. If He has such potentialpower, can there be any lying there?
We have to sacrifice ourselves for Krishna, because
He is the absolute good, beauty, and love. Faith andKRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 37
selflessness are required to such a high degree. If we
accept Krishna consciousness as our highest ideal, thenso much sacrifice is necessary, but sacrifice means life:“Die to live.” There is no loss by sacrifice. We can onlygain by giving ourselves.
So,kÈrtan, or preaching has been accepted as the
means to the end. There are so many ways by which wecan approach the souls of this world with kÈrtan: by
direct approach, through books, and by performingsa⁄kÈrtan , chanting the holy name congregationally.
By helping others, we help ourselves: we help our ownfortune and our own faith. Not only will others bene-fit by our performance of kÈrtan, but we will also ben-
efit eternally.
ETERNAL VACUUM
Krishna says in Bhagavad-gÈtÅ (2.47), “Never be
attached to not doing your duty (mÅ te sa⁄go ’stv
akarmaˆi). Because you are required to work for Me, will
you stop work? Don’t subject yourself to that painfulreaction, for then you will be doomed. Don’t beattached to stop work and strike. No. That is a dan-gerous vacuum. Don’t jump there in that eternal vac-uum, but work for Me, and you will thrive.” Krishnasays, “Abandon all varieties of duty, and just surrenderunto Me (sarva dharmÅn parityajya mÅm eka˜ Íaraˆa˜
vraja) . My position is such: I am your guardian, your
friend, your everything. Your goal of life is to be foundin Me. Believe it Arjuna. At least I must not deceive38T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
you. You are my friend—You can take it for certain.”
man-manÅ bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yÅjÈ mÅ˜ namaskuru mÅm evai›yasi satya˜ te pratijÅne priyo ’si me
—Bhagavad-gÈtÅ (18.65)
“Think of Me always, and become My devotee.
Worship Me, and bow down before Me. In this way
As ßrÈ Chaitanya, Lord Krishna came to preach about Himself.KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS : LOVE AND BEAUTY 39
you will certainly come to Me. My dear friend, I promise
you on oath, I am speaking the truth. I am everything.Try to come to Me. I am the goal, the fulfillment of lifenot only for you, but for everyone. From the absoluteconsideration My position is such. At least you are Myfriend. I won’t deceive you. You can believe Me. Ipromise that I am so.”
How shamelessly Krishna is expressing Himself
here. He has come to plead for Himself so much, forour benefit. And a record is kept in the Bhagavad-gÈtÅ
for our guidance. And Lord Krishna came as ßrÈChaitanya MahÅprabhu to preach about Himself. Hecame as His own canvasser with His eternal associates.He even brought ßrÈmatÈ RÅdhÅrÅˆÈ, devotion per-
sonified, along with Him, saying, “I will show howcharming Your position in My service is, how beauti-ful and dignified the devotion of My other half can be.So, come along with Me.” And Baladeva has come asNityÅnanda to canvass, and VÂndÅvana has come tocanvass itself in NavadwÈpa. So we are most indebtedto the canvasser, especially when Krishna Himselfhas come to canvass and to show how beautiful, howmagnanimous, and how sacrificing divine love is.40 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
The purpose of pilgrimage is to hear from the saintly persons
residing in a holy place. The following is a conversation withßrÈla ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj and three European students searching
India for truth.
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: Why have you come to India?
Student: For pilgrimage. We came to visit the holy
places like NavadwÈpa, VÂndÅvana, and JagannÅthaPurÈ. That was the main reason we came to India. ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: How have you come to know all
these things? By books? Student: Yes, by the books of ßrÈla PrabhupÅd.
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: What book?
Student: Bhagavad-gÈtÅ.
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: Oh. The Bhagavad-gÈtÅ As It Is by
Bhaktivedanta SwÅmÈ MahÅrÅj. Student: Yes.
B
HAGAVAD -G^Tå: “C URETHYSELF ”
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: Many years ago, a German scholar
expressed his opinion that Bhagavad-gÈtÅ is the highest
spiritual literature. His point was that Bhagavad-gÈtÅ
41SAINTS ,
SCRIPTURES ,
AND GURUS
clearly advises us not to try to correct our environ-
ment, but to correct ourselves, to adjust with the envi-ronment. That is the key to the advice of Bhagavad-gÈtÅ :
“Cure thyself.” We have no power to bring aboutchanges in the environment. That is arranged by thedivine will. Our environment, the sum total of all theforces acting outside us, is irremovable. We have noability to interfere with our environment; that willonly be a useless loss of energy. Rather, we must try tocorrect ourselves so that we can adjust with the cir-cumstances outside us: this is the key to our success inlife (tat te ’nukampÅ˜ susamÈk›amÅˆo). We have our
duty to perform, but we must not aspire after the resultsof our activities; the results depend on Krishna (karmaˆy
evÅdhikÅras te mÅ phale›u kadÅcana). We make our con-
tribution; at the same time, thousands of millions ofothers are contributing, creating the environment. So,we must do our duty, but we will have to accept the ulti-mate result as best, because it is arranged by theAbsolute. There are so many results to our individualactivities, but we must see how the absolute will har-monize everything and adjust ourselves accordingly.
Our responsibility lies only in discharging our duty.
We must never aspire after any definite environment;the environment will go on in its own way. We have nopower to change it. Rather, we must try our best tochange our own self so that we may come in harmonywith the environment.42 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
Our responsibility is never in enjoying the results of
our actions. Because we work for a particular resultand don’t obtain it, should we be discouraged? No. Weshould go on doing our own duty. Whatever we contri-bute should be offered to the infinite, and the infinitewill mold the results in His own way. Krishna says,“Never aspire after any particular result for your action.At the same time, don’t be idle. Don’t be worthless. Goon discharging your duty without depending on anyoutside consequence.”Student: Will we have to remember Krishna while we
are doing this?ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: Yes. Then we will be able to come in
connection with Krishna and gradually we will come toBhagavad-gÈtÅ —the highest spiritual literature. The Supreme
Lord Krishna instructs Arjuna, “Cure thyself.”SAINTS , SCRIPTURES , AND GURUS 43
realize that our environment is friendly to us. When the
reactions of our previous actions disappear, we will findthat every wave is carrying good news to us. When ouregoistic attitude vanishes, we will find ourself in themidst of sweet waves all around. We should try to doaway with whatever wrong we have done hitherto. Wemust do our duty and never expect any definite result,but cast it towards the infinite.
D
ISSOLVING EGO
And then one day will come when our egoistic feel-
ing will dissolve and from within, our real self, a mem-ber of the infinite world, will spring up and awaken, andwe will find ourselves in the sweet waves of thatenvironment. There, everything is sweet. The breeze issweet, the water is sweet, the trees are sweet, what-ever we come in contact with is sweet, sweet, sweet.
Our internal ego is our enemy, and to dissolve that
ego, we must do our duty as we think fit, but neverexpect any response according to our will. If we adopt thiskarma-yoga then in no time we will find that the wrong
ego, which was always expecting something crooked forits selfish purpose, has vanished; the broad, wide egowithin has come out, and we are in harmony with thewhole universe. The harmonious world will appear beforeus, and the cover of selfish desires will disappear.
The cause of our disease is not outside us, but within
us. A paramaha˜sa Vai›ˆava, a saint of the highest44 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
platform, sees that everything is all right. He finds no-
thing to complain about. When one can see that every-thing is good and sweet to the furthest extreme, hecomes to live in the plane of divinity. Our false ego cre-ates only disturbance, and that ego should be dissolved.We should not think that the environment is our enemy.We must try hard to detect God’s grace in whatevercomes to us, even if it comes as an apparent enemy.Everything is the grace of the Lord, but we can’t see it;rather, we see the opposite. The dirt is in our eyes.
Actually, everything is divine. It is all the grace of the
Lord. The disease is in our eyes. We are diseased, and ifthe disease is cured, we shall find that we are in themidst of a gracious world. Only the coverings of desiredeceive us from having a real estimation of the world. Abonafide student of the devotional school will acceptsuch an attitude towards the environment and towardsthe Lord. We have to think that God’s will is every-where. Even a blade of grass cannot move without thesanction of the Supreme Authority. Every detail isdetected and controlled by Him. We have to look uponthe environment with optimism. The pessimism iswithin us. Our ego is responsible for all sorts of evil.
INFINITE BLISSFULNESS
This is Vai›ˆavism. If we can do this, then in no
time, our disease will be cured, and we’ll be in the midstof infinite blissfulness. Our tendency at present is toSAINTS , SCRIPTURES , AND GURUS 45
cure what we see on the outside. We think, “I want
everything to follow my control, my sweet will. Wheneverything obeys me, then I will be happy.” But we musttake just the opposite attitude. As MahÅprabhu has said:
tÂˆÅd api sunÈcena
taror api sahi›ˆunÅamÅninÅ mÅnadenakÈrtanÈyaÓ sadÅ hariÓ
We should create no resistance against our envi-
ronment. Still, if some undesirable things come towardsus, we should tolerate that with our utmost patience.And even if someone attacks us we won’t become vio-lent; we must practice forbearance to the extreme. Weshall honor everyone; we will seek no honor.
In this way, with the least amount of energy and time
we can attain the highest goal: the plane where KrishnaHimself is living. That is the most fundamental planeof existence. At that time, all the encasements coveringthe soul will vanish and die, and the inner soul willawaken and find that he is playing in a sweet wave, danc-ing and merry-making in VÂndÅvana, with Krishna andHis devotees. And what is VÂndÅvana? It is neither afable, nor a concocted story. The broadest and widestplane of the whole universe is beauty, sweetness, andblissfulness, and that is present in VÂndÅvana in all its full-ness. We have to dive deep into that plane of reality.
Our ego has floated us on the surface of trouble in
mÅyÅ, illusion. Concoction, and the search for selfish46 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
satisfaction have taken us here, and these must be
dissolved once and for all. And then from within, ourgolden selves will come out, and we will find that we arein the plane of a happy dancing mood, with Krishna inVÂndÅvana.
H
EGEL’S“SELF-DETERMINATION ”
In Hegelian language, this is called “self-
determination.” Self-determination means we must dieto live. We must leave our material life and all ourmaterial habits; we have to die as we are if we want tohave a real life. We must give up our false ego. Ourmaterial habits from different births are collected inthe ego in subtle forms, not only from the experience ofhuman birth, but even from animal births, tree births,and so many other births. Krishna consciousness meansthe wholesale dissolution of the false ego. That con-cocted, selfish figure within us is our enemy. The realself is hopelessly buried beneath the false ego. So greatis the depth of our forgetfulness that we do not evenknow who we are. So, as the German philosopherHegel said, we have to “die to live.”
Reality is for itself and by itself. The world is not cre-
ated for our selfish end; it has a universal end, and weare part and parcel of that. We must come to an under-standing with the whole. The complete whole isKrishna and he is dancing, playing, and singing in Hisown way. We must enter into that harmonious dance.SAINTS , SCRIPTURES , AND GURUS 47
Being infinitesimal, should we think that the infinite
must be controlled by us? That by our whim every-thing will go on? This is the most crooked, heinousobject ever conceived, and we are suffering from sucha disease. This is the real problem in society. Our inquiryshould be aimed at solving this.Student: Does this mean we have to give up material
life completely?
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: Not at once. Everyone must progress
gradually, according to his own particular case. If onewho has much affinity towards worldly life suddenlyleaves that, he may not keep up his vows; he may godown again. So, according to personal capacity wemust make gradual progress. That is to be taken intoconsideration, but still, we should always be eager togive up everything and devote ourselves exclusively tothe highest duty. Those who have enough couragewill jump into the unknown, thinking, “Krishna willprotect me. I am jumping in the name of God. He iseverywhere; He will take me on His lap.” With thisidea, one who has real eagerness for the truth mayleap forward.
Student: I have a problem. For ten years I’ve tried to
take up this process. For ten years, I have kept from eat-ing meat, fish, and eggs. I avoid material things—Ihave no attraction for them. I have left all this behind.But there is one thing I want to give up and also Idon’t want to give up. This is gañja (marijuana).48 T HESEARCH FOR SRIKRISHNA
ßrÈdhar MahÅrÅj: That is a small thing. There are
three real difficulties: the first is women, the secondis money, and the third, good name and fame. Thesethree are our enemies. Marijuana intoxication is a smallthing. Anyone can give it up easily. But these threethings are the fundamental aspiration of every animal,tree, bird, man, or god. These three are everywhere.But intoxication and other fleeting habits are very neg-ligible things and can be conquered very easily.
As we have gradually come into the habit of
intoxication, we have to come out; gradually, and notsuddenly. Just after World War T wo, we read in thenewspaper that Goering, Hitler’s air general, was habit-uated to taking much intoxication. But when he wasput into jail, no intoxication was supplied to him. Hebecame sick, but treatment went on and he was cured.His disease was cured by the medicine. We also haveseen so many opium-eaters who came here, joined thetemple, and gradually left their habit.
Many so-called sÅdhus smoke marijuana. It helps
concentration, but that is the material mind. It dis-turbs faith. It is an enemy to faith. No material intoxi-cation, but only faith can take us to our desired goal.The misguided souls think that marijuana, hashish, andso many other things can help us in our meditation. Itmay do something, but that is mundane and that willfrustrate us in our time of need. These things cannothelp us rise up very high.SAINTS , SCRIPTURES , AND GURUS 49