All glory to the Divine Masterand the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Chaitanya
श्रीमद्भगवद्गीता
Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā
The Hidden Treasure of the Sweet Absolute
Revealed to the world by the dearmost associate-servitorof the illustrious Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava World PreceptorHis Divine Grace
Prabhupād Śrī Śrī Bhakti Siddhānta Saraswatī Goswāmī:
Founder-Āchārya of Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat MaṭhHis Divine Grace
Śrīmad Bhakti Rakṣak Śrīdhar Dev-Goswāmī Mahārāj
Produced by the merciful wish and direction ofhis most intimate servitor and personally selectedSevāite-President-Āchārya:His Divine Grace
Śrīmad Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-Goswāmī Mahārāj
Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat Maṭh, Nabadwīp
© 2006
All rights reserved by the Sevaite-President-acharya of
, Nabadwipwith international centres
Translated by
Sri Swarupananda Das
Assisted by
the devoted friends and contributors who worked in selfless service to make this edition possible by the grace of our dearmost Spiritual Master.
Published by Sadhu Shastra Seva for
Road,Kolerganj, P. O. Nabadwip,Dist. Nadia, Pin 741302,W. Bengal, India
Printed by Craft Print, Singapore
॥ अथ मङ्गलाचरणम् ॥
Maṅgalācharaṇam Auspicious Invocation
ॐ पार्थाय प्रतिबोधितां भगवता नारायणेन स्वयंव्यासेन ग्रथितां पुराणमुनिना मध्ये महाभारते ।अद्वैतामृतवर्षिणीं भगवतीमष्टाशाध्यायिनी-मम्ब त्वामनुसन्दधामि भगवद्गीते भवद्वेषिणीम् ॥१॥
oṁ pārthāya pratibodhitāṁ bhagavatā nārāyaṇena svayaṁvyāsena grathitāṁ purāṇa-muninā madhye mahā-bhārateadvaitāmṛta-varṣiṇīṁ bhagavatīm aṣṭādaśādhyāyiṇīmamba tvām anusandadhāmi bhagavad-gīte bhavad-veṣiṇīm [1]
Meditation on Śrī Gītā—
O Bhagavad-gītā, song of the Supreme Lord Himself, you are the bestower of Arjuna’s enlightenment. You have been woven into the scripture Mahābhārata by the ancient sage Śrīla Vedavyās. In eighteen chapters, you are the rain of ever-flowing nectar, non-different from the Lord. O Mother, I meditate upon you; may you graciously enter my heart.
नमोऽस्तुते व्यासविशालबुद्धे फुल्लारविन्दायतपत्रनेत्र ।येन त्वया भारततैलपूर्णः प्रज्वालितो ज्ञानमयः प्रदीपः ॥२॥
namo ’stu te vyāsa-viśāla-buddhephullāravindāyata-patra-netrayena tvayā bhārata-taila-pūrṇaḥprajvālito jñāna-mayaḥ pradīpaḥ [2]
Obeisances unto Śrīla Vyāsadev—
O Śrīla Vyāsadev of formidable intelligence, whose eyes resemble the long petals of the blooming lotus flower, and who ignited the lamp of knowledge, filled with the oil of the Mahābhārata—I offer my obeisances unto you.
प्रपन्नपारिजाताय तोत्रवेत्रैकपाणये ।ज्ञानमुद्राय कृष्णाय गीतामृतदुहे नमः ॥३॥
prapanna-pārijātāya totra-vetraika-pāṇayejñāna-mudrāya kṛṣṇāya gītāmṛta-duhe namaḥ [3]
Obeisances unto the Lord as the chariot-driver of Arjuna—
I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who fulfills the wishes of His surrendered devotees. He holds a driving-rod in one hand while the other is poised in the expression of instruction, and He is the milker of the nectar of the Gītā.
सर्व्वोपनिषदो गावो दोग्धा गोपालनन्दनः ।पार्थो वत्सः सुधीरभोक्ता दुग्धं गीतामृतं महत् ॥४॥
sarvopaniṣado gāvo dogdhā gopāla-nandanaḥpārtho vatsaḥ sudhīr bhoktā dugdhaṁ gītāmṛtaṁ mahat [4]
The Glories of the Gītā—
The crest-jewels of the Vedas, all the Upaniṣads, are as the cow, and the milker of the cow is Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāj. Arjuna is the calf, the nectar of the Gītā is the milk, and the fortunate devotees are the enjoyers of that milk.
वसुदेवसुतं देवं कंसचाणूरमर्द्दनम् ।देवकीपरमानन्दं कृष्णं वन्दे जगद्गुरुम् ॥५॥
vasudeva-sutaṁ devaṁ kaṁsa-chāṇūra-mardanamdevakī-paramānandaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ vande jagad-gurum [5]
Obeisances unto Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa—
I bow unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudev, the vanquisher of the demons Kaṁsa and Chāṇūra, the joy of mother Devakī, and the universal teacher.
भीष्मद्रोणतटा जयद्रथजला गान्धारनीलोत्पलाशल्यग्राहवती कृपेण वहनी कर्णेन वेलाकुला ।अश्वत्थामविकर्णघोरमकरा दुर्य्योधनावर्त्तिनीसोत्तीर्ण खलु पाण्डवै रणनदी कैवर्त्तकः केशवः ॥६॥
bhīṣma-droṇa-taṭā jayadratha-jalā gāndhāra-nīlotpalāśalya-grāhavatī kṛpeṇa vahanī karṇena velā-kulāaśvatthāma-vikarṇa-ghora-makarā duryodhanāvartinīsottīrṇā khalu pāṇḍavai raṇa-nadī kaivartakaḥ keśavaḥ [6]
The river of the battle of Kurukṣetra—
One bank is Bhīṣma, the other Droṇāchārya; Jayadratha is the water; the sons of Gāndhārī, the blue lotus flower; Śalya, the crocodile; Kṛpa, the waves; Karṇa, the shore; Aśvatthāmā, Vikarṇa and company, the fearful sharks; Duryodhan, the whirlpool; and Keśava is the boatman of this river of the battle that was crossed by the Pāṇḍavas.
पाराशर्य्यवचः सरोजममलं गीतार्थगन्धोत्कटंनानाख्यानककेसरं हरिकथासम्बोधनाबोधितम् ।लोके सज्जनषट्पदैरहरहःपेपीयमानं मुदाभूयाद्भारतपङ्कजं कलिमलप्रध्वंसि नः श्रेयसे ॥७॥
pārāśarya-vachaḥ sarojam-amalaṁ gītārtha-gandhotkaṭaṁnānākhyānaka-kesaraṁ hari-kathā-sambodhanābodhitamloke sajjana-ṣaṭ-padair ahar-ahaḥ pepīyamānaṁ mudābhūyād bhārata-paṅkajaṁ kali-mala-pradhvaṁsi naḥ śreyase [7]
The Mahābhārata as a lotus flower—
These words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyan Vyāsadev, the son of Parāśar Muni, are a perfect lotus flower. The meaning of the Gītā is the beautiful fragrance of this lotus, the various episodes are its stamens, and the enlightening narrations about the Supreme Lord are its nectar. In this world, the pure devotees are the bees who day after day delight in drinking the nectar of the lotus flower. May this Mahābhārata lotus, the vanquisher of all evils in this Age of Kali, graciously bestow auspiciousness upon us.
यं ब्रह्मा वरुणेन्द्ररुद्रमरुतस्तुन्वन्ति दिव्यैः स्तवैर्वेदैः साङ्गपदक्रमोपनिषदैर्गायन्ति यं सामगाः ।ध्यानावस्थिततद्गतेन मनसा पश्यन्ति यं योगिनोयस्यान्तं न विदुः सुरासुरगणा देवाय तस्मै नमः ॥८॥
yaṁ brahmā varuṇendra-rudra-maruta-stunvanti divyaiḥ stavairvedaiḥ sāṅga-pada-kramopaniṣadair gāyanti yaḥ sāmagāḥdhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginoyasyāntaṁ na viduḥ surāsura-gaṇā devāya tasmai namaḥ [8]
Obeisances unto the Supreme Lord—
I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Lord whose glories are sung with celestial prayers by the gods Brahmā, Varuṇ, Indra, Rudra, and the Maruts; whose glories are sung by the verses of the Vedas along with their six auxiliary books and the Upaniṣads; whose glories are sung by the brāhmaṇs that sing the Sāma-veda; who the yogīs see within their hearts absorbed in meditation; and whose infinite glories are inconceivable to all beings, whether gods or demons.
नारायणं नमस्कृत्य नरञ्चैव नरोत्तमम् ।देवीं सरस्वतीं व्यासं ततो जयमुदीरयेत् ॥९॥
nārāyaṇaṁ namskṛtya narañ chaiva narottamamdevīṁ sarasvatīṁ vyāsaṁ tato jayam udīrayet [9]
Before reciting the scriptures that can conquer material existence, we offer obeisances unto the Supreme Lord who is known as ‘Nārāyaṇ’, ‘Nara’, and ‘Narottam’; the goddess of learning Saraswatī; and the great sage empowered by the Lord to reveal the scriptures, Śrīla Vyāsadev.
All glory to Śrī Guru and Śrī Gaurāṅga
Preface
[Publisher’s Note, first bengali edition,appearance day of Lord Kṛṣṇa, 1961]
Unique in its wide publication and extensive circulation, the Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā appears in various languages, both in India and other countries, along with the commentaries of former great saints as well as modern scholars. The commentaries of the prominent Vaiṣṇava Āchāryas such as Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrīmat Madhva Muni, and Śrī Śrīdhar Swāmīpād are most noteable, whilst among the proponents of jñāna-mārg, or the monistic path, the commentaries of Śrīmat Śaṅkar Āchārya and Śrī Madhusūdan Saraswatī are well-known. The commentaries of Śrīyuta Bāla Gaṅgādhar Tilak and Śrī Aurobindo favour the school of karma-yoga, or the path of action, and are also familiar to modern scholars. Great thinkers of both East and West have ardently sung the glories of Śrī Gītā, being inspired by the ideals of its teachings.
However, the achintya-bhedābheda-siddhānta, theology of inconceivable oneness and difference, as revealed by the proponents of Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu—Gauḍīya Āchāryas Śrīla Viśvanāth Chakravartī and Śrīla Baladev Vidyābhūṣaṇ—is concluded by the learned devotees to be most favorable to exclusive devotion. The devotees also embrace Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur’s Bengali commentary on Śrī Gītā as a harmonious, spiritual mine of the treasure of divine love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa (Kṛṣṇa-prema), the fifth and transcendental goal of life, beyond the four general human objectives of religion, wealth, sense enjoyment, and liberation.
In his introduction my worshipful Divine Master, Śrī Guru Pāda-padma Om Viṣṇupād Paramahaṁsa Parivrājakāchārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Rakṣak Śrīdhar Dev-Goswāmī Mahārāj, has revealed to the readers glimpses of his own deep devotional realisations. Although numerous editions of Śrī Gītā are presently available, few commentaries can be said to nurture pure devotion according to the teachings of bona fide divine succession, which has given us the opportunity of service in producing this edition. We shall consider ourselves blessed if the fortunate readers take the all-auspicious essence of this sincere attempt to heart.
Śrī Bhakti Sundar Govinda
Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat Maṭh,
Nabadwīp
All glory to Śrī Guru and Śrī Gaurāṅga
Introduction
[of the first bengali edition]
वन्दे श्रीगुरुगौराङ्गौ राधागोविन्दसुन्दरौ ।सगुणौ गीयते चाथ गीतागूढार्थगौरवम् ॥
vande śrī-guru-gaurāṅgau rādhā-govinda-sundarausa-guṇau gīyate chātha gītā-gūḍhārtha-gauravam
Bowing down to the holy feet of Śrī Guru, Śrī Gaurāṅga, and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govindasundar, all accompanied by Their associates, I sing the glories of the hidden treasure of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.
Since Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā is very familiar to the learned society, an acquaintance of the conceptions of this edition may be given here. We are followers of the school of thought descending from Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu, so this edition is based on the Śrī Gītā commentaries of the pre-eminent, exalted Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Āchāryas—Śrī Viśvanāth, Śrī Baladev, and Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur.
By the grace of our worshipful Spiritual Master, Om Viṣṇupād Śrīla Bhakti Siddhānta Saraswatī Goswāmī Prabhupād, and from indications in the commentaries given by the aforementioned great pure devotees, in places some new light has been shed, revealing deeper meanings. The devoted reader will appreciate this particularly with regard to the four verses (10.8–11) which were described by Śrī Viśvanāthpād as the four essential verses (chatuḥ-ślokī) of the book.
Generally, Śrī Gītā is known as an excellent study of the science of religion. The language of Śrī Gītā is simple and sweet; its mood is grave, extensive, and radical; its thought is succinct, lucid, and impartial; and its logic is sound and natural. The eloquence of the prologue, epilogue, exposition, review, analysis, synthesis, and delivery of Śrī Gītā is unprecedented and charming in the extreme. Śrī Gītā is activation for the lazy, courage for the fearful, hope for the hopeless, and new life for the dying. Śrī Gītā unifies and sustains all ranks, whether revolutionary, occultist, optimist, renunciationist, liberationist, or full-fledged theist. From the atheist of grossly crude vision to the most elevated saint, the essential conceptions of all classes of philosophers are illustrated with clear and powerful logic. The devotees of the Lord (bhagavad-bhaktas) and persons on the paths of action, knowledge, and yoga (karmīs, jñānīs, and yogīs) will each find the essence of their paths dealt with in a comprehensive and illuminating manner, and thus the book is highly esteemed by all.
The essential and inner purport of the Vedas and Upaniṣads of the Āryans is directly explained, and the essence of various non-Āryan doctrines can also be found. Śrī Gītā teaches us enlightenment through the selfless execution of scripturally ordained actions. When the consciousness is thus purified, self-realisation or spiritual realisation is attained. In its maturity, this pure realisation blossoms into loving service in the joyful, divine plane.
From the standpoint of sambandha-jñān or ‘knowledge of relationship’, Śrī Gītā gives us the conception that the Absolute Reality is a transcendental personality; from the standpoint of prayojan or ‘the objective’, spiritual love for the Absolute Reality is given as the highest attainment; and from the standpoint of abhidheya or ‘the means’, we are taught that one must initially offer all his actions to the Supreme Lord, followed by the cultivation of self-realisation favourable to realisation of the Lord, and finally surrender to the Lord, to the exclusion of all other endeavours. Ultimately, the means will culminate in the objective when, in one’s perfected spiritual form, one whole-heartedly engages in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
Śrī Gītā has clearly shown the distinctions between the various paths, such as the path of action, including worship of the gods for worldly fulfillment, and the path of knowledge, for the attainment of liberation. The thoughtful reader can note that Śrī Gītā, by its comparative study, refutes the misconception that the many paths and goals are ‘all one’. Rather, it is stated, “Yo yach chhradhaḥ sa eva saḥ: a man is known by his faith.”
These verses would warrant deep consideration in this respect:
“The yogī is superior to persons engaged in austerities, superior to the person of knowledge, and superior to the person of action. Therefore, O Arjuna, be a yogī. And best of all yogīs is My faithful devotee for whom I am the only goal, and who serves Me whole-heartedly. This is My opinion.” (6.46–47)
Showing the inferiority and meaninglessness of dry renunciation, the gift of Śrī Gītā is most substantial and positive. Rather then merely renouncing action, one should selflessly offer one’s actions to the Supreme Lord (karma-yoga). Ultimately, based on one’s surrender, one will be inspired to act in devotion (bhakti) for the Lord alone. This is the conclusive and sublime teaching of Śrī Gītā. In the finest conception, the overall excellence of Śrī Gītā is found in its gift of devotion. In its full manifestation, such devotion is prema-bhakti, loving devotion to the all-attractive Supreme Personality—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Reality the Beautiful.
Secret, more secret, and the most secret of all teachings have been given, as the congregational chanting of the Holy Names of the Lord (saṅkīrtan), and service in spontaneity (bhāva-sevā), with exclusive surrender and dedication to the transcendental pleasure of Kṛṣṇa as the ultimate goal of life, as sung by the vibrant clarion call of Śrī Gītā—sarva-dharmān parityajya Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja—and as deeply contemplated by the followers of the lotus footsteps of the Supreme Lord who mercifully appears as the saviour in this Age of Kali—Śrī Chaitanyachandra, and as corroborated by the divine succession of saintly teachers.
May Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa accept the offering of this edition.
Swāmī B. R. Śrīdhar
Śrī Chaitanya Sāraswat Maṭh
Nabadwīp
Janmāṣṭamī
Bengali year 1368
प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Chapter One Sainya-darśana Observing the Armies
धृतराष्ट्र उवाच ।
धर्म्मक्षेत्रे कुरुक्षेत्रे समवेता युयुत्सवः ।मामकाः पाण्डवाश्चैव किमकुर्व्वत सञ्जय ॥१॥
dhṛtarāṣṭra uvācha
dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥmāmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś chaiva kim akurvata sañjaya [1]
dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ uvācha–Dhṛtarāṣṭra said: (he) sañjaya–O Sañjaya; dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre–at the holy land of Kurukṣetra; māmakāḥ–Duryodhan and party; pāṇḍavāḥ cha–and Yudhiṣṭhir and party; samavetāḥ–who assembled; yuyutsavaḥ–desirous of battle; eva–thereafter; akurvata kim–did what? [1]
1 Dhṛtarāṣṭra said: O Sañjaya, what happened when my sons and the sons of Pāṇḍu assembled for battle at the holy place of Kurukṣetra?
सञ्जय उवाच ।
दृष्ट्वा तु पाण्डवानीकं व्यूढं दुर्य्योधनस्तदा ।आचार्य्यमुपसङ्गम्य राजा वचनमब्रवीत् ॥२॥
sañjaya uvācha
dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadāāchāryam upasaṅgamya rājā vachanam abravīt [2]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: tadā tu–Then; rājā duryodhanaḥ–King Duryodhan; dṛṣṭvā–having seen; pāṇḍava-anīkam–the soldiers of the Pāṇḍavas; vyūḍham–arrayed in military formation; abravīt–spoke; vachanam–the following words; upasaṅgamya–approaching; āchāryam–Droṇāchārya. [2]
2 Sañjaya said: Seeing the Pāṇḍavas’ soldiers and armies arrayed for battle, King Duryodhan approached Droṇāchārya and said:
पश्यैतां पाण्डुपुत्राणामाचार्य्य महतीं चमूम् ।व्यूढां द्रुपदपुत्रेण तव शिष्येण धीमता ॥३॥
paśyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrāṇām āchārya mahatīṁ chamūmvyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā [3]
(he) āchārya–O respected teacher; paśya–please observe; etām mahatīm–this great; chamūm–army of seven akṣauhiṇīs (one akṣauhiṇī is 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot-soldiers); pāṇḍu-putrāṇām–of the Pāṇḍavas; vyūḍhām–arranged in military formation; tava dhīmatā śiṣyeṇa–by your intelligent disciple; drupada-putreṇa–Dhṛṣṭadyumna, the son of Drupada. [3]
3 O my teacher, please observe the great armies of the Pāṇḍavas, arranged in military formation by your brilliant disciple, Dhṛṣṭadyumna.
अत्र शूरा महेष्वासा भीमार्ज्जुनसमा युधि ।युयुधानो विराटश्च द्रुपदश्च महारथः ॥४॥
धृष्टकेतुश्चेकितानः काशिराजश्च वीर्य्यवान् ।पुरुजित्कुन्तिभोजश्च शैब्यश्च नरपुङ्गवः ॥५॥
युधामन्युश्च विक्रान्त उत्तमौजाश्च वीर्य्यवान् ।सौभद्रो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्व्व एव महारथाः ॥६॥
atra śūrā maheṣvāsā bhīmārjuna-samā yudhiyuyudhāno virāṭaś cha drupadaś cha mahā-rathaḥ [4]
dhṛṣṭaketuś chekitānaḥ kāśīrājaś cha vīryavānpurujit kuntibhojaś cha śaibyaś cha nara-puṅgavaḥ [5]
yudhāmanyuś cha vikrānta uttamaujāś cha vīryavānsaubhadro draupadeyāś cha sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ [6]
atra–In this phalanx; (santi)–are; śūrāḥ–warriors; maheṣvāsāḥ–great archers; bhīma-arjuna-samāḥ–comparable to Bhīma and Arjuna; yudhi–in battle; (yathā)–such as; yuyudhānaḥ–Sātyaki; cha–and; virāṭaḥ–King Virāṭa; mahā-rathaḥ drupadaḥ cha–and the great warrior Drupada; dhṛṣtaketuḥ–Dhṛṣtaketu; chekitānaḥ–King Chekitāna; vīryavān kāśīrājaḥ cha–and the powerful King of Kāśī; purujit–Purujit; kuntibhojaḥ cha–and Kuntibhoja; nara-puṅgavaḥ śaibyaḥ cha–and the noble King Śaibya; vikrāntaḥ yudhāmanyuḥ cha–and valiant Yudhāmanyu; vīryavān uttamaujāḥ cha–heroic Uttamaujā; saubhadraḥ–Abhimanyu; draupadeyāḥ cha–and the sons of Draupadī; eva–indeed; sarva mahā-rathāḥ–all great warriors. [4–6]
4–6 Among these soldiers are the expert archers Bhīma, Arjuna, and others equally skilled in battle, like Sātyaki, King Virāṭa, the great fighter Drupada, Dhṛṣṭaketu, Chekitāna, the mighty hero Kāśīrāj, Purujit, Kuntibhoja, the noble King Śaibya, the valiant Yudhāmanyu, the herioc Uttamaujā, Abhimanyu, and the sons of Draupadī. They are all great warriors, indeed.
अस्माकं तु विशिष्टा ये तान्निबोध द्विजोत्तम ।नायका मम सैन्यस्य संज्ञार्थं तान्ब्रवीमि ते ॥७॥
asmākaṁ tu viśiṣṭā ye tān nibodha dvijottamanāyakā mama sainyasya saṁjñārthaṁ tān bravīmi te [7]
(he) dvija-uttama–O Droṇāchārya, best of the twice-born; nibodha–kindly consider; tān–those; asmākam–of us; tu ye viśiṣṭāḥ–who are the prominent; nāyakāḥ–commanders; mama sainyasya–of my armies. bravīmi–I speak; te–to you; tān–of them; saṁjñā-artham–by name. [7]
7 O best of the twice-born, please consider, too, the foremost amongst us, the commanders of my armies. I submit their names before you:
भवान्भीष्मश्च कर्णश्च कृपश्च समितिञ्जयः ।अश्वत्थामा विकर्णश्च सौमदत्तिर्जयद्रथः ॥८॥
अन्ये च बहवः शूरा मदर्थे त्यक्तजीविताः ।नानाशस्त्रप्रहरणाः सर्व्वे युद्धविशारदाः ॥९॥
bhavān bhīṣmaś cha karṇaś cha kṛpaś cha samitiñjayaḥaśvatthāmā vikarṇaś cha saumadattir jayadrathaḥ [8]
anye cha bahavaḥ śūrā mad-arthe tyakta-jīvitāḥnānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ sarve yuddha-viśāradāḥ [9]
bhavān–Your respected self; bhīṣmaḥ cha–Bhīṣma; karṇaḥ cha–and Karṇa; samitiñjayaḥ kṛpaḥ cha–Kṛpa, who is victorious in battle; aśvatthāmā–Aśvatthāmā; vikarṇaḥ cha–Vikarṇa; saumadattiḥ–Bhūriśravā; jayadrathaḥ–Jayadratha; anye cha bahavaḥ śūrāḥ–and many other warriors; (santi)–are present; nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ–armed with various weapons; sarve–all; yuddha-viśāradāḥ–skilled in battle; tyakta-jīvitāḥ–and prepared to sacrifice their lives; mad-arthe–for my sake. [8–9]
8–9 Firstly there is your respected self, then Bhīṣma, Karṇa, the ever victorious Kṛpāchārya, Aśvatthāmā, Vikarṇa, Bhūriśravā, Jayadratha, and many other heroes skilled in the art of warfare, all armed with various weapons and prepared to lay down their very lives for me.
अपर्य्याप्तं तदस्माकं बलं भीष्माभिरक्षितम् ।पर्य्याप्तं त्विदमेतेषां बलं भीमाभिरक्षितम् ॥१०॥
aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ balaṁ bhīṣmābhirakṣitamparyāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam [10]
asmākam tat balam–That strength of our army; bhīṣma-abhirakṣitam–protected by Bhīṣma; (bhāti)–appears; aparyāptam–unlimited (or insufficient); tu–but; idam balam–the strength of this army; eteṣām–of theirs; bhīma-abhirakṣitam–protected by Bhīma; (bhāti)–appears; paryāptam–limited (or sufficient) [both interpretations are possible]. [10]
10 The strength of our army, headed by Bhīṣma, seems inestimable, yet the strength of the Pāṇḍavas’ army, protected by Bhīma, is estimable.
अयनेषु च सर्व्वेषु यथाभागमवस्थिताः ।भीष्ममेवाभिरक्षन्तु भवन्तः सर्व्व एव हि ॥११॥
ayaneṣu cha sarveṣu yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥbhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi [11]
bhavantaḥ–You; sarve eva hi–all indeed; abhirakṣantu–may support; bhīṣmam eva–Bhīṣma; sarveṣu ayaneṣu cha–at all points of entrance into the formation; avasthitāḥ (santaḥ)–being situated; yathā-bhāgam–at your posts. [11]
11 Now take up your posts at the strategic points of the formation in support of Bhīṣma.
तस्य सञ्जनयन्हर्षं कुरुवृद्धः पितामहः ।सिंहनादं विनद्योच्चैः शङ्खं दध्मौ प्रतापवान् ॥१२॥
tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥsiṁha-nādaṁ vinadyochchaiḥ śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān [12]
pratāpavān–The hero; kuru-vṛddhaḥ-pitāmahaḥ–the venerable ‘grandfather’ Bhīṣma; siṁha-nādam vinadya–roaring like the lion; śaṅkham dadhmau–then blew his conchshell; uchchaiḥ–very loudly; tasya harṣam sañjanayan–for the pleasure of Duryodhan. [12]
12 Then, with a war-cry like the roar of a lion, the venerable elder, Bhīṣma, loudly blew his conchshell to encourage Duryodhan.
ततः शङ्खाश्च भेर्य्यश्च पणवानकगोमुखाः ।सहसैवाभ्यहन्यन्त स शब्दस्तुमुलोऽभवत् ॥१३॥
tataḥ śaṅkhāś cha bheryaś cha paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥsahasaivābhyahanyanta sa śabdas tumulo ’bhavat [13]
tataḥ–Thereafter; śaṅkhāḥ cha bheryaḥ cha paṇava-ānaka gomukhāḥ–conchshells, kettledrums, hand-drums, bugles, and other instruments; sahasā eva abhyahanyanta–were immediately sounded. saḥ śabdaḥ–That sound; tumulaḥ abhavat–was tumultuous. [13]
13 At once there arose a tumultuous vibration of conchshells, kettledrums, hand-drums, bugles, and the resounding of many instruments.
ततः श्वेतैर्हयैर्युक्ते महति स्यन्दने स्थितौ ।माधवः पाण्डवश्चैव दिव्यौ शङ्खौ प्रदध्मतुः ॥१४॥
tataḥ śvetair hayair yukte mahati syandane sthitaumādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaś chaiva divyau śaṅkhau pradadhmatuḥ [14]
tataḥ–Thereafter; mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaḥ cha eva–both Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna; sthitau–situated; mahati syandane–in a magnificent chariot; śvetaiḥ hayaiḥ yukte–yoked with white horses; pradadhmatuḥ–sounded; divyau śaṅkhau–divine conchshells. [14]
14 Then Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, in a magnificent chariot drawn by white horses, blew their divine conchshells.
पाञ्चजन्यं हृषीकेशो देवदत्तं धनञ्जयः ।पौण्ड्रं दध्मौ महाशङ्खं भीमकर्म्मा वृकोदरः ॥१५॥
pāñchajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥpauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ [15]
hṛṣīkeśaḥ–Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dadhmau–sounded; pāñchajanyam–the Pāñchajanya; dhanañjayaḥ–Arjuna (sounded); devadattam–the Devadatta; (cha)–and; bhīmakarmā vṛkodaraḥ–the performer of mighty tasks, Bhīmasen (sounded); mahā-śaṅkham–the great conchshell; pauṇḍram–named Pauṇḍra. [15]
15 Hṛṣīkeś blew His conchshell Pāñchajanya; Dhanañjaya sounded his, the Devadatta; and Bhīmasen, the performer of mighty tasks, blew the conchshell Pauṇḍra.
अनन्तविजयं राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः ।नकुलः सहदेवश्च सुघोषमणिपुष्पकौ ॥१६॥
anantavijayaṁ rājā kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥnakulaḥ sahadevaś cha sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau [16]
kuntī-putraḥ rājā yudhiṣṭhiraḥ–King Yudhiṣṭhir, the son of Kuntī; (dadhmau)–sounded; anantavijayam–the Anantavijay; nakulaḥ sahadevaḥ cha–and Nakula and Sahadeva (sounded); sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau–the conchshells named Sughoṣa and Maṇipuṣpaka. [16]
16 King Yudhiṣṭhir, the son of Kuntī, blew the Anantavijay, while Nakul and Sahadev blew the conchshells Sughoṣa and Maṇipuṣpaka.
काश्यश्च परमेष्वासः शिखण्डी च महारथः ।धृष्टद्युम्नो विराटश्च सात्यकिश्चापराजितः ॥१७॥
द्रुपदो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्व्वशः पृथिवीपते ।सौभद्रश्च महाबाहुः शङ्खान्दध्मुः पृथक्पृथक् ॥१८॥
kāśyaś cha parameṣv-āsaḥ śikhaṇḍī cha mahā-rathaḥdhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś cha sātyakiś chāparājitaḥ [17]
drupado draupadeyāś cha sarvaśaḥ pṛthivī-patesaubhadraś cha mahā-bāhuḥ śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak [18]
(he) pṛthivī-pate–O lord of the earth, Dhṛtarāṣṭra; kāśyaḥ cha–the King of Kāśī; parama-iṣu-āsaḥ–skilled in bowmanship; mahā-rathaḥ śikhaṇḍī cha–and the great warrior, Śikhaṇḍī; dhṛṣṭadyumnaḥ virāṭaḥ cha–Dhṛṣṭadyumna and King Virāṭa; cha–and; aparājitaḥ–the unconquerable; sātyakiḥ–Sātyaki; drupadaḥ–King Drupada; draupadeyāḥ cha–the sons of Draupadī; mahā-bāhuḥ saubhadraḥ cha–and the mighty Abhimanyu; sarvaśaḥ–all; dadhmuḥ–sounded; pṛthak pṛthak śaṅkhān–their respective conchshells. [17–18]
17–18 O lord of the earth, the skilled archer Kāśīrāj, the great warrior Śikhaṇḍī, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, King Virāṭa, the unconquerable Sātyaki, King Drupada, the sons of Draupadī, and the mighty son of Subhadrā, Abhimanyu—all blew their conchshells.
स घोषो धार्त्तराष्ट्राणां हृदयानि व्यदारयत् ।नभश्च पृथिवीञ्चैव तुमुलोऽभ्यनुनादयन् ॥१९॥
sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ hṛdayāni vyadārayatnabhaś cha pṛthivīñ chaiva tumulo ’bhyanunādayan [19]
saḥ tumulaḥ ghoṣaḥ–That tumultuous sound; abhyanunādayan–echoing; pṛthivīm cha nabhaḥ cha eva–throughout the land and heavens; vyadārayat–rent, pierced; hṛdayāni–the hearts; dhārtarāṣṭrāṇām–of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. [19]
19 Resounding throughout the land and heavens, the tremendous vibration of those conchshells pierced the hearts of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
अथ व्यवस्थितान्दृष्ट्वा धार्त्तराष्ट्रान्कपिध्वजः ।प्रवृत्ते शस्त्रसम्पाते धनुरुद्यम्य पाण्डवः ।हृषीकेशं तदा वाक्यमिदमाह महीपते ॥२०॥
atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā dhārtarāṣṭrān kapi-dhvajaḥpravṛtte śastra-sampāte dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥhṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam idam āha mahī-pate [20]
(he) mahī-pate–O King; atha–thereafter; pravṛtte (sati)–at the time for commencing; śastra-sampāte–the casting of weapons; kapi-dhvajaḥ pāṇḍavaḥ–Arjuna of the Hanumān flag; dhārtarāṣṭrān vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā–having seen the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra arrayed before him ready for battle; tadā–at that time; dhanuḥ udyamya–taking up his bow; āha–spoke; idam vākyam–these words; hṛṣīkeśam–to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. [20]
20 O King, as the battle was about to commence, Arjuna, whose chariot was adorned with the flag of Hanumān, seeing Duryodhan and his army poised for battle, took up his bow and said to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये रथं स्थापय मेऽच्युत ॥२१॥
यावदेतान्निरीक्षेऽहं योद्धुकामानवस्थितान् ।कैर्मया सह योद्धव्यमस्मिन्रणसमुद्यमे ॥२२॥
योत्स्यमानानवेक्षेऽहं य एतेऽत्र समागताः ।धार्त्तराष्ट्रस्य दुर्बुद्धेर्युद्धे प्रियचिकीर्षवः ॥२३॥
arjuna uvācha
senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’chyuta [21]
yāvad etān nirīkṣe ’haṁ yoddhu-kāmān avasthitānkair mayā saha yoddhavyam asmin raṇa-samudyame [22]
yotsyamānān avekṣe ’haṁ ya ete ’tra samāgatāḥdhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher yuddhe priya-chikīrṣavaḥ [23]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) achyuta–O Achyuta; sthāpaya–please place; me ratham–my chariot; madhye–between; ubhayoḥ senayoḥ–both armies; yāvat–so that; aham–I; nirīkṣe–can observe; yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān etān–these warriors desirous of battle; kaiḥ saha–with whom; mayā yoddhavyam–I have to fight; asmin raṇa-samudyame–on this battlefield; aham–and I; avekṣe–may see; (tān) yotsyamānān–the warriors; atra yuddhe–in this battle; ete ye samāgatāḥ–who have come; priya-chikīrṣavaḥ–as well-wishers; durbuddheḥ dhārtarāṣṭrasya–of wicked Duryodhan. [21–23]
21–23 O Kṛṣṇa, please place my chariot between the two armies so I may observe the warriors with whom I must contend on this battlefield, and who have come to fight for the satisfaction of the wicked Duryodhan.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
एवमुक्तो हृषीकेशो गुडाकेशेन भारत ।सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये स्थापयित्वा रथोत्तमम् ॥२४॥
भीष्मद्रोणप्रमुखतः सर्व्वेषाञ्च महीक्षिताम् ।उवाच पार्थ पश्यैतान्समवेतान्कुरूनिति ॥२५।
sañjaya uvācha
evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo guḍākeśena bhāratasenayor ubhayor madhye sthāpayitvā rathottamam [24]
bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ sarveṣāñ cha mahīkṣitāmuvācha pārtha paśyaitān samavetān kurūn iti [25]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: (he) bhārata–O Dhṛtarāṣṭra; evam uktaḥ (san)–this being spoken; guḍākeśena–by Arjuna, the conqueror of sleep; hṛṣīkeśaḥ–Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sthāpayitvā–placing; ratha-uttamam–the grand chariot; ubhayoḥ senayoḥ madhye–between both armies; (purataḥ)–before; bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ–Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and company; sarveṣām cha mahī-kṣitām–and all the chieftains; uvācha iti–spoke thus: (he) pārtha–O Arjuna; paśya–behold; samavetān etān kurūn–these assembled Kurus. [24–25]
24–25 Sañjaya said: O descendant of Bharat, after the vigilant Arjuna spoke these words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the perceptions of all living beings, drew the grand chariot between both armies, before Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and all the chieftains of the earth. The Lord then said: O Pārtha, behold the Kauravas assembled here for battle!
तत्रापश्यत्स्थितान्पार्थः पितॄनथ पितामहान् ।आचार्य्यान्मातुलान्भ्रातॄन्पुत्रान्पौत्रान्सखींस्तथा ।श्वशुरान्सुहृदश्चैव सेनयोरुभयोरपि ॥२६॥
tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ pitṝn atha pitāmahānāchāryān mātulān bhrātṝn putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathāśvaśurān suhṛdaś chaiva senayor ubhayor api [26]
atha–Thereafter; eva–certainly; pārthaḥ–Arjuna; api apaśyat–could also see; sthitān–situated; tatra–there; (madhye)–within; ubhayoḥ senayoḥ–both armies; pitṝn–paternal elders; pitāmahān–grandfathers; āchāryān–teachers; mātulān–maternal elders; bhrātṝn–brothers; putrān–sons; pautrān–grandsons; sakhīn–friends; tathā śvaśurān–fathers-in-law; suhṛdaḥ cha–and well-wishers. [26]
26 There, within both armies, Arjuna saw paternal and maternal elders, grandfathers, teachers, brothers, sons, grandsons, fathers-in-law, friends, and other well-wishers.
तान्समीक्ष्य स कौन्तेयः सर्व्वान्बन्धूनवस्थितान् ।कृपया परयाविष्टो विषीदन्नदमब्रवीत् ॥२७॥
tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ sarvān bandhūn avasthitānkṛpayā parayāviṣṭo viṣīdann idam abravīt [27]
samīkṣya–Seeing; tān sarvān bandhūn–all these kinsmen; avasthitān–present; (tatra)–on the battlefield; saḥ kaunteyaḥ–that son of Kuntī; parayā kṛpayā āviṣṭaḥ–overwhelmed with great compassion; viṣīdan (san)–and being grief-stricken; idam abravīt–spoke thus. [27]
27 Seeing his kinsmen present on the battlefield, Arjuna, the son of Kuntī, was grief-stricken and overcome with pity. He said:
अर्ज्जुन उवाच
दृष्ट्वेमान्स्वजनान्कृष्ण युयुत्सून्समवस्थितान् ।सीदन्ति मम गात्राणि मुखञ्च परिशुष्यति ॥२८॥
arjuna uvācha
dṛṣṭvemān svajanān kṛṣṇa yuyutsūn samavasthitānsīdanti mama gātrāṇi mukhañ cha pariśuṣyati [28]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; imān svajanān–all these friends and relatives; samavasthitān–assembled; yuyutsūn–and desirous of battle; mama gātrāṇi–my body; sīdanti–feels exhausted; mukham cha pariśuṣyati–and my mouth is becoming dry. [28]
28 O Kṛṣṇa, seeing all these relatives and friends assembled and eager for battle, the strength is draining from my limbs and my mouth feels parched.
वेपथुश्च शरीरे मे रोमहर्षश्च जायते ।गाण्डीवं स्रंसते हस्तात्त्वक्चैव परिदह्यते ॥२९॥
vepathuś cha śarīre me roma-harṣaś cha jāyategāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt tvak chaiva paridahyate [29]
me śarīre–In my body; vepathuḥ–are tremors; cha–and; romaharṣaḥ–bodily hairs standing on end; cha jāyate–is also occuring. gāṇḍīvam–The bow Gāṇḍīva; sraṁsate–is slipping; hastāt–from my hand; tvak cha–and my skin; paridahyate eva–burns too. [29]
29 I am trembling and the hairs on my body are standing on end, my skin is burning, and I am losing grip of my Gāṇḍīva bow.
न च शक्नोम्यवस्थातुं भ्रमतीव च मे मनः ।निमित्तानि च पश्यामि विपरीतानि केशव ॥३०॥
na cha śaknomy avasthātuṁ bhramatīva cha me manaḥnimittāni cha paśyāmi viparītāni keśava [30]
(he) keśava–O Śrī Kṛṣṇa; cha–and; (aham)–I; na śaknomi–am unable to; avasthātum cha–compose myself any longer; iva–as; me manaḥ–my mind; bhramati–is flickering; paśyāmi cha–and I see; viparītāni nimittāni–bad omens. [30]
30 O Keśava, I cannot maintain my composure any longer. My mind is disturbed, and I see bad omens.
न च श्रेयोऽनुपश्यामि हत्वा स्वजनमाहवे ।न काङ्क्षे विजयं कृष्ण न च राज्यं सुखानि च ॥३१॥
na cha śreyo ’nupaśyāmi hatvā svajanam āhavena kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa na cha rājyaṁ sukhāni cha [31]
(he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; na anupaśyāmi cha–nor do I see; śreyaḥ–any good; svajanam hatvā–in killing my kinsmen; āhave–in battle. (aham)–I; vijayam na kāṅkṣe–desire neither victory; na cha rājyam cha sukhāni–nor the enjoyment of a kingdom. [31]
31 I do not see any good in killing my kinsmen in this battle. O Kṛṣṇa, I have no wish for victory or to enjoy a kingdom.
किं नो राज्येन गोविन्द किं भोगैर्जीवितेन वा ।येषामर्थे काङ्क्षितं नो राज्यं भोगाः सुखानि च ॥३२॥
त इमेऽवस्थिता युद्धे प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा धनानि च ।आचार्य्याः पितरः पुत्रास्तथैव च पितामहाः ॥३३॥
मातुलाः श्वशुराः पौत्राः श्यालाः संबन्धिनस्तथा ।एतान्न हन्तुमिच्छामि घ्नतोऽपि मधुसूदन ॥३४॥
kiṁ no rājyena govinda kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vāyeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni cha [32]
ta ime ’vasthitā yuddhe prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni chaāchāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās tathaiva cha pitāmahāḥ [33]
mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathāetān na hantum ichchhāmi ghnato ’pi madhusūdana [34]
(he) govinda–O Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kim naḥ rājyena–of what value is our kingdom; kim vā bhogaiḥ jīvitena–and what is the need of its royal pleasures, or life itself; yeṣām arthe–if those for whom; naḥ–our; rājyam bhogāḥ sukhāni cha–kingdom with its pleasures and enjoyable objects; kāṅkṣitam–is desirable; te ime–all these; āchāryaḥ–teachers; pitaraḥ–fatherly elders; putrāḥ–sons; tathā eva cha–and also even; pitāmahāḥ–grandfathers; mātulāḥ–maternal uncles; śvaśurāḥ–fathers-in-law; pautrāḥ–grandsons; śyālāḥ–brothers-in-law; tathā sambandhinaḥ–and other relatives; yuddhe avasthitāḥ–are present on the battlefield; tyaktvā–risking; dhanāni prāṇān cha–their wealth and lives? (he) madhusūdana–(Therefore,) O Madhusūdan; ghnataḥ api–though I may be killed by them; na ichchhāmi–I do not wish; etān hantum–to kill them. [32–34]
32–34 O Govinda, if those for whom we desire all this—teachers, paternal and maternal elders, sons, grandfathers, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives—are about to risk their wealth and lives in battle, of what value is our kingdom and its royal pleasures, or even life itself? O Madhusūdan, I do not wish to kill them even though I, myself, may be killed.
अपि त्रैलोक्यराज्यस्य हेतोः किं नु महीकृते ।निहत्य धार्त्तराष्ट्रान्नः का प्रीतिः स्याज्जनार्द्दन ॥३५॥
api trailokya-rājyasya hetoḥ kiṁ nu mahī-kṛtenihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ kā prītiḥ syāj janārdana [35]
(he) janārdana–O Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kā prītiḥ syāt–what happiness can be possible; naḥ–for us; nihatya–by killing; dhārtarāṣṭrān–the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; trailokya rājyasya hetoḥ api–for the sovereignty of even the three worlds; mahī-kṛte kim nu–not to speak of ruling the earth? [35]
35 O Janārdan, even if we gain sovereignty over the three worlds, not to speak of ruling the earth, how can we be happy if we kill the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra?
पापमेवाश्रयेदस्मान्हत्वैतानाततायिनः ।तस्मान्नार्हा वयं हन्तुं धार्त्तराष्ट्रान्स्वबान्धवान् ।स्वजनं हि कथं हत्वा सुखिनः स्याम माधव ॥३६॥
pāpam evāśrayed asmān hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥtasmān nārhā vayaṁ hantuṁ dhārtarāṣṭrān svabāndhavānsvajanaṁ hi kathaṁ hatvā sukhinaḥ syāma mādhava [36]
(he) mādhava–O Mādhava; pāpam eva–only sin; āśrayet–will enter; asmān–us; hatvā–by killing; etān ātatāyinaḥ–these adversaries. tasmāt–Therefore; vayam–we; na arhāḥ–are wrong; hantum–to kill; svabāndhavān–our own family members; dhārtarāṣṭrān–the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. svajanam hatvā hi–By killing our kinsmen; katham–how; (vayam) syāma–can we be; sukhinaḥ–happy? [36]
36 Only sin will befall us if we slay our teachers and guardians, though they be our adversaries. We cannot take the lives of our own relatives, the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. O Mādhava, how can we be happy by killing our kinsmen?
यद्यप्येते न पश्यन्ति लोभोपहतचेतसः ।कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं मित्रद्रोहे च पातकम् ॥३७॥
कथं न ज्ञेयमस्माभिः पापादस्मान्निवर्त्तितुम् ।कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं प्रपश्यद्भिर्जनार्द्दन ॥३८॥
yadyapy ete na paśyanti lobhopahata-chetasaḥkula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ mitra-drohe cha pātakam [37]
kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ pāpād asmān nivartitumkula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ prapaśyadbhir janārdana [38]
(he) janārdana–O Janārdan, Kṛṣṇa; yadyapi ete–although these persons; lobha-upahata-chetasaḥ (santaḥ)–their hearts being afflicted with greed; pātakam na paśyanti–do not see the sin; mitra-drohe–of betraying one’s friends; cha–and; kula-kṣaya-kṛtam doṣam–the sin of destroying the dynasty; (tathāpi)–nonetheless; katham–how; na jñeyam–should it not be known; asmābhiḥ–by us; nivartitum–to refrain; asmāt pāpāt–from this sinful act; prapaśyadbhiḥ–clearly seeing; kula-kṣaya-kṛtam doṣam–the evil of destroying the dynasty? [37–38]
37–38 Athough they, overwhelmed with greed, cannot see the sin of betraying one’s friends and destroying the dynasty, O Janārdan, how can we not refrain from this heinous act, being in full knowledge of the consequences?
कुलक्षये प्रणश्यन्ति कुलधर्म्माः सनातनाः ।धर्म्मे नष्टे कुलं कृत्स्नमधर्म्मोऽभिभवत्युत ॥३९॥
kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥdharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta [39]
kula-kṣaye–With the decline of the dynasty; sanātanāḥ–the traditional; kula-dharmāḥ–religious practices of the dynasty; praṇaśyanti–are destroyed. dharme naṣṭe (sati)–When religious practices are lost; adharmaḥ–irreligion; abhibhavati–overcomes; kṛtsnam uta kulam–the entire dynasty. [39]
39 With the decline of the dynasty, its religious traditions are lost. When religious practices are lost, irreligion overcomes the entire dynasty.
अधर्म्माभिभवात्कृष्ण प्रदुष्यन्ति कुलस्त्रियः ।स्त्रीषु दुष्टासु वार्ष्णेय जायते वर्णसङ्करः ॥४०॥
adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥstrīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ [40]
(he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; adharma-abhibhavāt–when the family is overcome by irreligion; kula-striyaḥ–the women of the family; praduṣyanti–are polluted. (he) vārṣṇeya–O descendant of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty; strīṣu duṣṭāsu (satsu)–when the women of the family become corrupt; jāyate–the result is; varṇa-saṅkaraḥ–adulterated progeny. [40]
40 O Kṛṣṇa, descendant of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, when the dynasty is thus overcome by irreligion, the women of the family become corrupt and adulterated progeny is the result.
सङ्करो नरकायैव कुलघ्नानां कुलस्य च ।पतन्ति पितरो ह्येषां लुप्तपिण्डोदकक्रियाः ॥४१॥
saṅkaro narakāyaiva kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya chapatanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ [41]
saṅkaraḥ–Adulterated progeny; narakāya eva (bhavati)–causes a hellish condition; kulasya kula-ghnānām cha–for both the dynasty and its destroyers. eṣām–Their; pitaraḥ–forefathers; patanti hi–surely fall; lupta-piṇḍa-udaka-kriyāḥ–due to the cessation of obsequial offerings of food and water. [41]
41 Adulterated progeny forces both the family and its aggressors into a hellish existence. The same fate befalls their ancestors, because regular offerings of food and water to them cease.
दोषैरेतैः कुलघ्नानां वर्णसङ्करकारकैः ।उत्साद्यन्ते जातिधर्म्माः कुलधर्म्माश्च शाश्वताः ॥४२॥
doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥutsādyante jāti-dharmāḥ kula-dharmāś cha śāśvatāḥ [42]
etaiḥ doṣaiḥ–By such heinous acts; kula-ghnānām–of the destroyers of the dynasty; varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ–causing varṇa-saṅkara, adulterated progeny; śāśvatāḥ–traditional; kula-dharmāḥ jāti-dharmāḥ cha–familial and socio-religious functions; utsādyante–are ruined. [42]
42 Such heinous acts by the destroyers of the dynasty are the cause of adulterated progeny, ruining the culture of a civilized society and noble lineage.
उत्सन्नकुलधर्म्माणां मनुष्याणां जनार्द्दन ।नरके नियतं वासो भवतीत्यनुशुश्रुम ॥४३॥
utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdananarake niyataṁ vāso bhavatīty anuśuśruma [43]
(he) janārdana–O Janārdan; (vayam) anuśuśruma–We have heard; iti–that; manuṣyāṇām–for those persons; utsanna-kula-dharmāṇām–whose family traditions have been destroyed; niyatam–constant; narake vāsaḥ–residence in hell; bhavati–occurs. [43]
43 O Janārdan, we have heard that persons whose familial, social and religious traditions are disrupted dwell always in hell.
अहो बत महत्पापं कर्त्तुं व्यवसिता वयम् ।यद्राज्यसुखलोभेन हन्तुं स्वजनमुद्यताः ॥४४॥
aho bata mahat-pāpaṁ kartuṁ vyavasitā vayamyad rājya-sukha-lobhena hantuṁ svajanam udyatāḥ [44]
aho bata–Alas, what a tragedy! vayam–We; vyavasitāḥ–have resolved; kartum–to commit; mahat-pāpam–a most heinous sin. yat rājya-sukha-lobhena–Out of greed for royal pleasures; udyatāḥ–we are prepared; svajanam hantum–to slay our relatives. [44]
44 Alas, what a grave sin we have resolved to commit! Driven by greed for trifling royal happiness, we are about to slay our own kinsmen.
यदि मामप्रतीकारमशस्त्रं शस्त्रपाणयः ।धार्त्तराष्ट्रा रणे हन्युस्तन्मे क्षेमतरं भवेत् ॥४५॥
yadi mām apratīkāram aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥdhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus tan me kṣemataraṁ bhavet [45]
yadi–If; dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ–the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; śastra-pāṇayaḥ–equipped with weapons; hanyuḥ–kill; mām–me; aśastram–unarmed; apratīkāram–and unresisting; raṇe–in battle; tat–that; bhavet–will be; kṣemataram–more auspicious; me–for me. [45]
45 If, unarmed and unresisting, I am killed on this battlefield by the armed sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, that will be more auspicious for me.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
एवमुक्त्वार्ज्जुनः सङ्ख्ये  रथोपस्थ उपाविशत् ।विसृज्य सशरं चापं शोकसंविग्नमानसः ॥४६॥
sañjaya uvācha
evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye rathopastha upāviśatvisṛjya sa-śaraṁ chāpaṁ śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ [46]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: arjunaḥ–Arjuna; evam uktvā–having thus spoken; saṅkhye–on the battlefield; visṛjya–casting aside; chāpam–bow; sa-śaram–and arrows; upāviśat–sat down; ratha-upasthaḥ–on the chariot; śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ–his heart heavy with sorrow. [46]
46 Sañjaya said: There, on the battlefield, speaking these words, Arjuna cast aside his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his heart filled with sadness.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्यांभीष्मपर्व्वणि श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रेश्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे सैन्यदर्शनं नाम प्रथमोऽध्यायः ॥१॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahma-vidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde sainya-darśanaṁ nāma prathamo ’dhyāyaḥ [1]
End of Chapter OneObserving the Armiesfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Chapter Two Sāṅkhya-yoga The Constitution of the Soul
सञ्जय उवाच ।
तं तथा कृपयाविष्टमश्रुपूर्णाकुलेक्षणम् ।विषीदन्तमदं वाक्यमुवाच मधुसूदनः ॥१॥
sañjaya uvācha
taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇamviṣīdantam idaṁ vākyam uvācha madhusūdanaḥ [1]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: madhusūdanaḥ–Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tathā–then; uvācha–spoke; idam vākyam–these words; viṣīdantam tam–to the saddened Arjuna; kṛpayā-āviṣṭam–whose heart was filled with pity; aśru-pūrṇa-ākula-īkṣaṇam–his eyes brimming with tears, showing his distress. [1]
1 Sañjaya said: The Supreme Lord, Madhusūdan, then spoke to the saddened Arjuna whose heart was filled with pity, his eyes brimming with tears.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
कुतस्त्वा कश्मलमदं विषमे समुपस्थितम् ।अनार्य्यजुष्टमस्वर्ग्यमकीर्त्तिकरमर्ज्जुन ॥२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ viṣame samupasthitamanārya-juṣṭam asvargyam akīrti-karam arjuna [2]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; viṣame–in this crisis; kutaḥ–how; idam kaśmalam–has this illusion; tvā–of yours; samupasthitam–occured? anārya-juṣṭam–This does not befit an Āryan (noble person); asvargyam–it is an obstacle to the attainment of heaven; akīrti-karam–and the cause of infamy. [2]
2 The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, how has such illusion overcome you at this crucial moment? This does not befit an Āryan, and it leads not to heaven but to infamy.
क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ नैतत्त्वय्यपपद्यते ।क्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परन्तप ॥३॥
klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha naitat tvayy upapadyatekṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ tyaktvottiṣṭha parantapa [3]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; klaibyam mā sma gamaḥ–do not be overcome by cowardice. etat–This; na upapadyate–does not befit; tvayi–you. (he) parantapa–O subduer of the enemy; tyaktvā–giving up; kṣudram hṛdaya-daurbalyam–petty weakheartedness; uttiṣṭha–arise for battle. [3]
3 O son of Kuntī, give up this cowardice, for it does not befit you. O great hero, cast off this petty weakness of heart and arise for battle!
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
कथं भीष्ममहं सङ्ख्ये  द्रोणञ्च मधुसूदन ।इषुभिः प्रतियोत्स्यामि पूजार्हावरिसूदन ॥४॥
arjuna uvācha
kathaṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye droṇañ cha madhusūdanaiṣubhiḥ pratiyotsyāmi pūjārhāv arisūdana [4]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) madhusūdana arisūdana–O Madhusūdan, slayer of the enemy; katham aham–how can I; pratiyotsyāmi–counterattack; iṣubhiḥ–with arrows; saṅkhye–in battle; (lakṣī-kṛtya)–aiming at; pūjā-arhau–worshippable; bhīṣmam droṇam cha–Bhīṣma and Droṇa? [4]
4 Arjuna said: O Madhusūdan, slayer of the enemy, how can I counterattack, shooting arrows at venerable Bhīṣma and my teacher Droṇa, who are worthy of my worship?
गुरूनहत्वा हि महानुभावाञ्श्रेयो भोक्तुं भैक्ष्यमपीह लोके ।हत्वार्थकामांस्तु गुरूनहैवभुञ्जीय भोगान्रुधिरप्रदिग्धान् ॥५॥
gurūn ahatvā hi mahānubhāvāñśreyo bhoktuṁ bhaikṣyam apīha lokehatvārtha-kāmāṁs tu gurūn ihaivabhuñjīya bhogān rudhira-pradigdhān [5]
śreyaḥ–Better; bhaikṣyam api bhoktum–to live on food obtained by begging; iha loke–in this world; ahatvā hi–without killing; mahā-anubhāvān gurūn–noble elders and teachers. tu–Otherwise; gurūn hatvā–by killing our teachers and superiors; bhuñjīya–we shall enjoy; rudhira-pradigdhān–their blood-tainted; artha-kāmān bhogān–wealth and coveted enjoyable objects; iha eva–here. [5]
5 It is better to live in this world and beg, without taking the lives of our noble elders and teachers. Otherwise, by killing them we shall remain in this world only to enjoy their wealth and possessions tainted with their blood.
न चैतद्वद्मः कतरन्नो गरीयोयद्वा जयेम यदि वा नो जयेयुः ।यानेव हत्वा न जिजीविषामस्तेऽवस्थिताः प्रमुखे धार्त्तराष्ट्राः ॥६॥
na chaitad vidmaḥ kataran no garīyoyad vā jayema yadi vā no jayeyuḥyān eva hatvā na jijīviṣāmaste ’vasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ [6]
yat vā–If indeed; (vayam)–we; jayema–win; yadi vā–or if; (ete)–these men; naḥ jayeyuḥ–happen to conquer us; na cha vidmaḥ–we do not understand; etat katarat–which of these; garīyaḥ–is more beneficial; naḥ–for us. te dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ–Those very sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; yān hatvā–by killing whom; na jijīviṣāmaḥ eva–we do not wish to even live; avasthitāḥ–are present; pramukhe–before us for battle. [6]
6 I cannot understand which will be better—victory or defeat; for if we kill the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who now stand before us on the battlefront, we shall not wish to live.
कार्पण्यदोषोपहतस्वभावःपृच्छामि त्वां धर्म्मसम्मूढचेताः ।यच्छ्रेयः स्यान्निश्चतं ब्रूहि तन्मेशिष्यस्तेऽहं शाधि मां त्वां  प्रपन्नम् ॥७॥
kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥpṛchchhāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-chetāḥyach chhreyaḥ syān niśchitaṁ brūhi tan meśiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam [7]
kārpaṇya-doṣa upahata-svabhāvaḥ–Losing heart, thus losing the courage of the warrior by apprehending the fall of the dynasty; (tathā)–and; dharma-sammūḍha-chetāḥ–bewildered in determining my duty and non-duty; (aham) pṛchchhāmi–I am asking; tvām–You; (tvam) brūhi–You please say; tat–that (course of action); yat–which; syāt–may; niśchitam–be ascertained; śreyaḥ–as best; me–for me. aham–I am; te śiṣyaḥ–ready for Your counsel and direction; (ataḥ)–therefore; śādhi–please instruct; mām–me; tvām prapannam–Your surrendered soul. [7]
7 Now I am bewildered. What is my real duty? I am losing heart and distraught. So please tell me clearly what is the best course of action to take. I am Your surrendered disciple; please instruct me.
न हि प्रपश्यामि ममापनुद्याद्यच्छोकमुच्छोषणमिन्द्रियाणाम् ।अवाप्य भूमावसपत्नमृद्धंराज्यं सुराणामपि चाधिपत्यम् ॥८॥
na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyādyach chhokam uchchhoṣaṇam indriyāṇāmavāpya bhūmāv asapatnam ṛddhaṁ rājyaṁ surāṇām api chādhipatyam [8]
avāpya–After gaining; asapatnam–an unrivalled; ṛddham–expansive; rājyam–kingdom; bhūmau–on earth; cha–and; ādhipatyam–sovereignty; surāṇām api–over even the demigods; (aham)–I; na hi prapaśyāmi–do not see; yat–that which; apanudyāt–will dispel; mama–my; śokam–grief; uchchhoṣaṇam–that saps; indriyāṇām–my senses. [8]
8 Even if we gain an unrivalled, flourishing kingdom on earth and sovereignty over heaven, I see nothing to dispel my debilitating grief.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
एवमुक्त्वा हृषीकेशं गुडाकेशः परन्तपः ।न योत्स्य इति गोविन्दमुक्त्वा तूष्णीं बभूव ह ॥९॥
sañjaya uvācha
evam uktvā hṛṣīkeśaṁ guḍākeśaḥ parantapaḥna yotsya iti govindam uktvā tūṣṇīṁ babhūva ha [9]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: evam uktvā–Having spoken thus; hṛṣīkeśam–unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa; guḍākeśaḥ–sense-controlled Arjuna, the conqueror of sleep; parantapaḥ–the chastiser of the enemy; uktvā iti–then said; govindam–to Govinda: (aham) na yotsye–“I shall not fight”; babhūva ha–and then was; tūṣṇīm–silent. [9]
9 Sañjaya said: Thus the valiant, vigilant Arjuna spoke to Kṛṣṇa, who is Hṛṣīkeś, the Lord of the senses of all beings. Then he declared, “Govinda, I will not fight”, and fell silent.
तमुवाच हृषीकेशः प्रहसन्निव भारत ।सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये विषीदन्तमिदं वचः ॥१०॥
tam uvācha hṛṣīkeśaḥ prahasann iva bhāratasenayor ubhayor madhye viṣīdantam idaṁ vachaḥ [10]
(he) bhārata–O Dhṛtarāṣṭra; ubhayoḥ senayoḥ madhye–situated between both armies; hṛṣīkeśaḥ–Hṛṣīkeś, Kṛṣṇa; prahasan iva–smilingly; uvācha–spoke; idam vachaḥ–these words; viṣīdantam–to the grief-stricken; tam–Arjuna. [10]
10 O Bhārat, there amidst the armies, Śrī Hṛṣīkeś, smiling, spoke thus to the grief-stricken Arjuna:
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
अशोच्यानन्वशोचस्त्वं प्रज्ञावादांश्च भाषसे ।गतासूनगतासूंश्च नानुशोचन्ति पण्डिताः ॥११॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
aśochyān anvaśochas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś cha bhāṣasegatāsūn agatāsūṁś cha nānuśochanti paṇḍitāḥ [11]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: tvam–you; anvaśochaḥ–are lamenting; aśochyān–for those unworthy of grief; prajñā-vādān cha bhāṣase–and speaking like a wise man. paṇḍitāḥ–The wise; na anuśochanti–do not lament; gatāsūn–for the dead; agatāsūn cha–or the living. [11]
11 The Lord said: O Arjuna, you are lamenting for that which is unworthy of grief, yet speaking words of wisdom. The wise lament neither for the living nor the dead.
न त्वेवाहं जातु नासं न त्वं नेमे जनाधिपाः ।न चैव न भविष्यामः सर्व्वे वयमतः परम् ॥१२॥
na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥna chaiva na bhaviṣyāmaḥ sarve vayam ataḥ param [12]
(iti) tu na eva–It is not a fact that; aham–I; na āsam–did not exist; jātu–ever before; (iti) na–nor is it that; tvam na–you did not exist; (iti na)–nor is it that; ime janādhipāḥ–all these kings; na–did not exist; cha–and; (iti na) eva–nor is it that; sarve vayam na bhaviṣyāmaḥ–we will all no longer exist; ataḥ param–hereafter. [12]
12 Never was there a time when you, I, or all these kings did not exist. Just as we exist in the present, so have we existed in the past, and shall continue to exist in the future.
देहिनोऽस्मिन्यथा देहे कौमारं यौवनं जरा ।तथा देहान्तरप्राप्तिर्धीरस्तत्र न मुह्यति ॥१३॥
dehino ’smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarātathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [13]
yathā–As; asmin dehe–in this body; dehinaḥ–of the embodied living being; kaumāram–childhood; yauvanam–youth; jarā–and old age; (bhavati)–occur; tathā–so also; deha-antara prāptiḥ–the attainment of yet another body; (bhavati)–occurs. dhīraḥ–The wise; na muhyati–are not deluded; tatra–by that. [13]
13 As the living being passes through the bodily changes of childhood, youth, and old age, it similarly attains another body at death. The wise are not deluded by this.
मात्रास्पर्शास्तु कौन्तेय शीतोष्णसुखदुःखदाः ।आगमापायिनोऽनित्यास्तांस्तितिक्षस्व भारत ॥१४॥
mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥāgamāpāyino ’nityās tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata [14]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna, son of Kuntī; mātrā-sparśāḥ tu–material contact—the engagement of the senses with their objects; śīta-uṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ–produces cold and heat, pleasure and pain sensations. (te) āgama-apāyinaḥ–These come and go; anityāḥ–and are temporary. (ataḥ)–Therefore; (he) bhārata–O Arjuna; titikṣasva–endure; tān–them. [14]
14 O son of Kuntī, the engagement of the senses with their objects produces the sensations of cold, heat, pleasure, and pain. But these effects are temporary—they come and go. Therefore, O Bhārat, you must endure them.
यं हि न व्यथयन्त्येते पुरुषं पुरुषर्षभ ।समदुःखसुखं धीरं सोऽमृतत्वाय कल्पते ॥१५॥
yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabhasama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate [15]
(he) puruṣa-ṛṣabha–O noblest of men; saḥ dhīram puruṣam–the wise man; sama-duḥkha-sukham–equipoised in happiness and unhappiness; yam–who; ete–these; (mātrā-sparśāḥ)–actions of the senses engaging with material sense objects; na vyathayanti–cannot disturb; kalpate hi–is alone qualified; amṛtatvāya–for immortality. [15]
15 O noblest of men, the wise man who is equipoised in pleasure and pain, and undisturbed by sense-experiences, is alone qualified for immortality.
नासतो विद्यते भावो नाभावो विद्यते सतः ।उभयोरपि दृष्टोऽन्तस्त्वनयोस्तत्त्वदर्शिभिः ॥१६॥
nāsato vidyate bhāvo nābhāvo vidyate sataḥubhayor api dṛṣṭo ’ntas tv anayos tattva-darśibhiḥ [16]
asataḥ–Of a destructible object; na vidyate–there is no; bhāvaḥ–eternal existence; tu–and; sataḥ–of an eternal object; na vidyate–there is no; abhāvaḥ–destruction. antaḥ–Such a conclusion, i.e., of the nature; anayoḥ ubhayoḥ api–of each; dṛṣṭaḥ–has been realised; tattva-darśibhiḥ–by the seers of the truth.
16 Of the asat (destructible object, such as the mutable body and associated phenomena) there is no eternal existence; of the sat (eternal object, the soul) there is no destruction or change. The nature of each has been realised by the seers of the truth.
अविनाशि तु तद्विद्धि येन सर्व्वमिदं ततम् ।विनाशमव्ययस्यास्य न कश्चित्कर्त्तुमर्हति ॥१७॥
avināśi tu tad viddhi yena sarvam idaṁ tatamvināśam avyayasyāsya na kaśchit kartum arhati [17]
tu–But; viddhi–know that; tat–the soul; yena–by which; idam sarvam–this entire body; tatam–is pervaded; avināśi–is indestructible. na kaśchit–No one; arhati–is able; vināśam kartum–to bring about the destruction; avyayasya asya–of this imperishable soul. [17]
17 Know that the soul, by which the entire body is pervaded, is indestructible. No one can destroy the imperishable soul.
अन्तवन्त इमे देहा नित्यस्योक्ताः शरीरिणः ।अनाशिनोऽप्रमेयस्य तस्माद्युध्यस्व भारत ॥१८॥
antavanta ime dehā nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥanāśino ’prameyasya tasmād yudhyasva bhārata [18]
śarīriṇaḥ–Of the living being; nityasya–who is always the same; anāśinaḥ–indestructible; aprameyasya–and immeasurable, due to his extremely subtle nature; ime dehāḥ–all these bodies; uktāḥ–are said to be; antavantaḥ–subject to destruction; tasmāt–therefore; (he) bhārata–O Arjuna; yudhyasva–fight. [18]
18 The soul is said to be eternal, indestructible and immeasurable. Only these physical bodies are subject to destruction. Therefore fight, O Bhārat.
य एनं वेत्ति हन्तारं यश्चैनं मन्यते हतम् ।उभौ तौ न विजानीतो नायं हन्ति न हन्यते ॥१९॥
ya enaṁ vetti hantāraṁ yaś chainaṁ manyate hatamubhau tau na vijānīto nāyaṁ hanti na hanyate [19]
yaḥ–Those persons who; vetti–think; enam–this soul to be; hantāram–a killer; yaḥ cha enam manyate–and those who think it; hatam–killed; tau ubhau–both of them; na vijānītaḥ–are ignorant; (yasmāt)–since; ayam–this soul; na hanti–neither kills anyone; na hanyate–nor is killed by anyone. [19]
19 Those who think the living being slays, and those who think it is slain, are ignorant of the true nature of the soul; for the soul neither slays nor is slain.
न जायते म्रियते वा कदाचिन्नायं भूत्वा भविता वा न भूयः ।अजो नित्यः शाश्वतोऽयं पुराणो
न हन्यते हन्यमाने शरीरे ॥२०॥
na jāyate mriyate vā kadāchinnāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥajo nityaḥ śāśvato ’yaṁ purāṇona hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [20]
ayam–This soul; na jāyate–is neither born; vā na mriyate–nor dies; kadāchit–at any time; bhūtvā na vā–nor being; bhavitā–will it be created; bhūyaḥ–again. ayam ajaḥ–This soul is birthless; nityaḥ–eternal; śāśvataḥ–free from decay; purāṇaḥ–ancient, changeless; (cha)–and; (ayam)–the soul; na hanyate–is never destroyed; śarīre hanyamāne (api)–even if the body is destroyed. [20]
20 The soul is neither born nor dies; it has neither been nor will it be created, because it is unborn and eternal. It is ever-youthful, yet ancient. It is not destroyed when the body is destroyed.
वेदाविनाशिनं नित्यं य एनमजमव्ययम् ।कथं स पुरुषः पार्थ कं घातयति हन्ति कम् ॥२१॥
vedāvināśinaṁ nityaṁ ya enam ajam avyayamkathaṁ sa puruṣaḥ pārtha kaṁ ghātayati hanti kam [21]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; yaḥ–that person who; veda–knows; enam–this soul as; nityam–eternal; ajam–birthless; avyayam–immutable; avināśinam–and indestructible; katham–how can; saḥ puruṣaḥ ghātayati–that person cause the death; kam–of anyone; (vā)–or; (katham)–how can; hanti–he kill; kam–anyone? [21]
21 O Pārtha, knowing the soul to be indestructible, eternal, birthless and immutable, how can a person kill or cause anyone to be killed?
वासांसि जीर्णानि यथा विहायनवानि गृह्णाति नरोऽपराणि ।तथा शरीराणि विहाय जीर्णान्य्अन्यानि संयाति नवानि देही ॥२२॥
vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāyanavāni gṛhṇāti naro ’parāṇitathā śarīrāṇi vihāya jīrṇānyanyāni saṁyāti navāni dehī [22]
yathā–As; naraḥ–a man; vihāya–rejecting; jīrṇāni vāsāṁsi–torn clothes; gṛhṇāti–accepts; aparāṇi navāni–new garments; tathā–similarly; dehī–the soul; vihāya–rejecting; jīrṇāni–old and decrepit; śarīrāṇi–bodies; saṁyāti–accepts; anyāni navāni–new bodies. [22]
22 As a person adopts new garments, discarding those that are old and worn, similarly, the soul continues to adopt new bodies, leaving those that are old and useless.
नैनं छिन्दन्ति शस्त्राणि नैनं दहति पावकः ।न चैनं क्लेदयन्त्यापो न शोषयति मारुतः ॥२३॥
nainaṁ chhindanti śastrāṇi nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥna chainaṁ kledayanty āpo na śoṣayati mārutaḥ [23]
śastrāṇi–Weapons; na chhindanti–cannot pierce; enam–the soul; pāvakaḥ–fire; na dahati–cannot burn; enam–the soul; āpaḥ–water; na kledayanti–cannot dampen; enam–the soul; cha–and; mārutah–the air; na śoṣayati–cannot dry; (enam)–the soul. [23]
23 Weapons cannot pierce the soul, and fire cannot burn it. Water cannot wet it, and air cannot dry it.
अच्छेद्योऽयमदाह्योऽयमक्लेद्योऽशोष्य एव च ।नित्यः सर्व्वगतः स्थाणुरचलोऽयं सनातनः ॥२४॥
अव्यक्तोऽयमचिन्त्योऽयमविकार्य्योऽयमुच्यते ।तस्मादेवं विदित्वैनं नानुशोचितुमर्हसि ॥२५॥
achchhedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam akledyo ’śoṣya eva chanityaḥ sarva-gataḥ sthāṇur achalo ’yaṁ sanātanaḥ [24]
avyakto ’yam achintyo ’yam avikāryo ’yam uchyatetasmād evaṁ viditvainaṁ nānuśochitum arhasi [25]
ayam achchhedyaḥ–The soul is indivisible; ayam adāhyaḥ–it cannot be burned; (ayam) akledyaḥ–it cannot be moistened; (ayam) aśoṣyaḥ eva cha–and it cannot be dried. ayam nityaḥ–It is everlasting; sarva-gataḥ–reaching all planes, migratory through all species of life according to its actions; sthāṇuḥ–still; achalaḥ–immovable; sanātanaḥ–beginningless, changeless, ever-present. ayam uchyate–It is said to be; avyaktaḥ–imperceptible due to its extremely subtle nature; ayam achintyaḥ–inconceivable; ayam avikāryaḥ–and untransformable. tasmāt–Therefore; viditvā–knowing; enam–the soul; evam–as such; anuśochitum na arhasi–it is inappropriate to grieve for it. [24–25]
24–25 It is said that the soul is indivisible and cannot be burned, moistened, or dried. It is eternal, it reaches all planes yet remains still, immovable, and ever-present. It is imperceptible, inconceivable, and untransformable (by the sixfold transformations*). Therefore, knowing the nature of the soul as such, there is no reason to lament for it.
*Birth, existence, growth, maturity, diminution, and destruction.
अथ चैनं नित्यजातं नित्यं वा मन्यसे मृतम् ।तथापि त्वं महाबाहो नैनं शोचितुमर्हसि ॥२६॥जातस्य हि ध्रुवो मृत्युर्ध्रुवं जन्म मृतस्य च ।तस्मादपरिहार्य्येऽर्थे न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि ॥२७॥
atha chainaṁ nitya-jātaṁ nityaṁ vā manyase mṛtamtathāpi tvaṁ mahā-bāho nainaṁ śochitum arhasi [26]
jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya chatasmād aparihārye ’rthe na tvaṁ śochitum arhasi [27]
(he) mahā-bāho–O best of warriors, Arjuna; atha cha–and even if; manyase–you think; enam–the soul; nitya-jātam–to be always born; vā–or; nityam mṛtam–always subject to death; tathā api–even then; tvam–you; sochitum na arhasi–ought not grieve; enam–for it; hi–since; jātasya–for one who has taken birth; mṛtyuḥ–death; dhruvaḥ–is certain; mṛtasya cha–and for one who is dead; janma–birth, for undergoing the reactions to his past actions; dhruvam–is certain. tasmāt–Therefore; tvam–you; na arhasi–ought not; śochitum–grieve; aparihārye arthe–for the inevitable. [26–27]
26–27 And, O best of warriors, even if you think that the soul is perpetually subject to birth and death, you still have no reason to lament. For one who is born, death is certain, and for one who dies, he must be reborn to undergo the reactions of his past actions. Therefore, you should not lament over the inevitable.
अव्यक्तादीनि भूतानि व्यक्तमध्यानि भारत ।अव्यक्तनिधनान्येव तत्र का परिदेवना ॥२८॥
avyaktādīni bhūtāni vyakta-madhyāni bhārataavyakta-nidhanāny eva tatra kā paridevanā [28]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; bhūtāni–of the living beings; avyaktādīni–the situation before birth is unknown; vyakta-madhyāni–the period between birth and death is known; avyakta-nidhanāny eva–and the situation after death is again unknown; kā paridevanā–so what cause is there for grief; tatra–in that matter?
28 O Bhārat, when all living beings are unmanifest before birth, manifest between birth and death, and again unmanifest at death, why lament for them?
आश्चर्य्यवत्पश्यति कश्चिदेनम्आश्चर्य्यवद्वदति तथैव चान्यः ।आश्चर्य्यवच्चैनमन्यः शृणोतिश्रुत्वाप्येनं वेद न चैव कश्चित् ॥२९॥
āścharyavat paśyati kaśchid enamāścharyavad vadati tathaiva chānyaḥāścharyavach chainam anyaḥ śṛṇotiśrutvāpy enaṁ veda na chaiva kaśchit [29]
kaśchit–Some persons; paśyati–see; enam–the soul; āścharyavat–as astonishing. tathā eva–Similarly; anyaḥ cha–others, too; vadati–describe; (enam)–the soul; āścharyavat–as astonishing; anyaḥ cha–and others; śṛṇoti–hear; enam–of the soul; āścharyavat–as astonishing; kaśchit cha eva–and some; śrutvā api–though hearing about it; na veda–do not know; enam–the soul. [29]
29 Some see the soul as astonishing, some describe it as astonishing, some hear of it as astonishing, while others, though hearing about it, know nothing of it.
देही नित्यमवध्योऽयं देहे सर्व्वस्य भारत ।तस्मात्सर्व्वाणि भूतानि न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि ॥३०॥
dehī nityam avadhyo ’yaṁ dehe sarvasya bhāratatasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni na tvaṁ śochitum arhasi [30]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; dehe–in the bodies; sarvasya–of all living beings; ayam–this; dehī–soul; nityam–is eternal; avadhyaḥ–unslayable. tasmāt–Therefore; tvam–you; śochitum na arhasi–should not lament; sarvāṇi bhūtāni–for any living beings. [30]
30 O Bhārat, the soul dwelling within the bodies of all living beings is eternal and cannot be slain. Therefore, you need lament for no one.
स्वधर्म्ममपि चावेक्ष्य न विकम्पितुमर्हसि ।धर्म्म्याद्धि युद्धाच्छ्रेयोऽन्यत्क्षत्रियस्य न विद्यते ॥३१॥
svadharmam api chāvekṣya na vikampitum arhasidharmyāddhi yuddhāch chhreyo ’nyat kṣatriyasya na vidyate [31]
api–Moreover; na arhasi–you should not; vikampitum–fear; cha avekṣya–considering, too; svadharmam–your natural duty as a warrior; hi–since; kṣatriyasya–for a kṣatriya, or one who upholds the law; na vidyate–there is no; anyat śreyaḥ–better course of action; dharmyāt yudhāt–than a battle for justice.
31 Moreover, considering your natural duty, you have no reason to waver, since there is no action more auspicious for a warrior than a battle for justice.
यदृच्छया चोपपन्नं स्वर्गद्वारमपावृतम् ।सुखिनः क्षत्रियाः पार्थ लभन्ते युद्धमीदृशम् ॥३२॥
yadṛchchhayā chopapannaṁ svarga-dvāram apāvṛtamsukhinaḥ kṣatriyāḥ pārtha labhante yuddham īdṛśam [32]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; sukhinaḥ–the fortunate; kṣatriyāḥ–warriors; labhante–attain; yuddham–a battle; īdṛśam–like this; upapannam–present; yadṛchchhayā–of its own accord; apāvṛtam svarga-dvāram cha–as an open door to heaven. [32]
32 O Pārtha, only the most fortunate warriors are blessed with the opportunity of such a battle, which has come to you like an open door to heaven.
Commentary
One’s natural duty or ‘svadharma’ is of two types—relative or absolute—according to the soul’s state of either material bondage or liberation respectively. In the liberated state, the natural function of the soul is purely spiritual devotional service, for the transcendental pleasure of the Supreme Lord alone. But in the state of material bondage, a person’s natural duty possesses mundane attributes. The conditioned soul accepts various births throughout the 8,400,000 species of life according to his actions, until by the influence of piety he obtains a human birth. Then, according to his nature, he may adopt a position and prescribed duty in the God-centred socio-religious system (Daiva-varṇāśram), which helps one attain the natural duty of the liberated state.
In this respect, the natural duty of the liberated soul is somewhat covered by the relativity of the material world; yet, within the God-centred socio-religious system, it is nonetheless considered a person’s natural duty, as, for example, smoke-covered fire is still considered fire, despite its covering.
अथ चेत्त्वमिमं धर्म्म्यं सङ्ग्रामं न करिष्यसि ।ततः स्वधर्म्मं कीर्त्तिञ्च हित्वा पापमवाप्स्यसि ॥३३॥
atha chet tvam imaṁ dharmyaṁ saṅgrāmaṁ na kariṣyasitataḥ svadharmaṁ kīrtiñ cha hitvā pāpam avāpsyasi [33]
atha–Otherwise; chet–if; tvam–you; na kariṣyasi–do not engage; imam dharmyam saṅgrāmam–in this battle for justice; tataḥ–then; hitvā–leaving; svadharmam kīrtim cha–the kṣatriya’s duty and glory; avāpsyasi–you will incur; pāpam–sin. [33]
33 But if you choose not to fight this battle for justice, your religious principles will be lost, fame will desert you, and sin will overcome you.
अकीर्त्तिञ्चापि भूतानि कथयिष्यन्ति तेऽव्ययाम् ।सम्भावितस्य चाकीर्त्तिर्मरणादतिरिच्यते ॥३४॥
akīrtiñ chāpi bhūtāni kathayiṣyanti te ’vyayāmsambhāvitasya chākīrtir maraṇād atirichyate [34]
cha–Also; bhūtāni–the people; kathayiṣyanti–will speak; avyayām–for all time; te–of your; akīrtim api–infamy; cha–and; akīrtiḥ–infamy; atirichyate–is worse; maraṇāt–than death; sambhāvitasya–for the respected. [34]
34 People will speak of your infamy for all time to come; and for the renowned, infamy is worse than death.
भयाद्रणादुपरतं मंस्यन्ते त्वां महारथाः ।येषाञ्च त्वं बहुमतो भूत्वा यास्यसि लाघवम् ॥३५॥
bhayād raṇād uparataṁ maṁsyante tvāṁ mahā-rathāḥyeṣāñ cha tvaṁ bahu-mato bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam [35]
mahā-rathāḥ–Great warriors like Duryodhan and others; maṁsyante–will consider that; tvām–you; uparatam–desisted; raṇāt–from battle; bhayāt–out of fear; cha–and; yeṣāṁ–of those for whom; tvam–you; bahu-mataḥ bhūtvā–have been the object of great honour; lāghavam yāsyasi–you will be held the object of ridicule. [35]
35 The great warriors who highly honour you will ridicule you, considering that you were afraid to fight.
अवाच्यवादांश्च बहून्वदिष्यन्ति तवाहिताः ।निन्दन्तस्तव सामर्थ्यं ततो दुःखतरं नु किम् ॥३६॥
avāchya-vādāṁś cha bahūn vadiṣyanti tavāhitāḥnindantas tava sāmarthyaṁ tato duḥkhataraṁ nu kim [36]
tava ahitāḥ–Your enemies; vadiṣyanti–will speak; bahūn avāchya-vādān cha–many unworthy words; nindantaḥ–condemning; tava sāmarthyam–your capabilities. nu–Alas, Arjuna; kim–what could be; duḥkhataram–more painful; tataḥ–than that? [36]
36 Your enemies will mock you. What could be more painful?
हतो वा प्राप्स्यसि स्वर्गं जित्वा वा भोक्ष्यसे महीम् ।तस्मादुत्तिष्ठ कौन्तेय युद्धाय कृतनिश्चयः ॥३७॥
hato vā prāpsyasi svargaṁ jitvā vā bhokṣyase mahīmtasmād uttiṣṭha kaunteya yuddhāya kṛta-niśchayaḥ [37]
hataḥ vā–If killed in battle; svargam prāpsyasi–you will attain heaven; jitvā vā–or by gaining victory; bhokṣyase–you will enjoy; mahīm–the earth. tasmāt–Therefore; (he) kaunteya–O Arjuna; kṛta-niśchayaḥ (san)–being confident of success; uttiṣṭha–arise; yuddhāya–for battle. [37]
37 O son of Kuntī, if you are killed, you will attain heaven, and if you are victorious, you will enjoy your life on earth. Therefore, being confident of your success, arise for battle!
सुखदुःखे समे कृत्वा लाभालाभौ जयाजयौ ।ततो युद्धाय युज्यस्व नैवं पापमवाप्स्यसि ॥३८॥
sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā lābhālābhau jayājayautato yuddhāya yujyasva naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi [38]
same kṛtvā–By seeing with an attitude of equanimity; sukha-duḥkhe–pleasure and pain; lābha-alābhau–gain and loss; jaya-ajayau (cha)–and victory and defeat; tataḥ–thereafter; yujyasva–engage; yuddhāya–in battle. evam–In this way; na avāpsyasi–you will not incur; pāpam–sin. [38]
38 Considering pleasure and pain, gain and loss, and victory and defeat to be one and the same—fight. No sin will be incurred by you.
एषा तेऽभिहिता साङ्ख्ये बुद्धिर्योगे त्विमां शृनु ॥बुद्ध्या युक्तो यया पार्थ कर्म्मबन्धं प्रहास्यसि ॥३९॥
eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛnubuddhyā yukto yayā pārtha karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi [39]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; abhihitā te–I have revealed to you; eṣā buddhiḥ sāṅkhye–this knowledge of the soul. tu–Further; śṛṇu–hear of; imām–this knowledge; yoge–in (bhakti-) yoga, in practice; yayā buddhyā yuktaḥ–attaining which wisdom; prahāsyasi–you will be completely freed; karma-bandham–from the bondage of action. [39]
39 I have revealed to you this knowledge (buddhi) of the soul. Now hear from Me how to act in this knowledge (bhakti-yoga), through which you will be able to free yourself from the bondage of action.
Commentary
“It will be revealed that buddhi-yoga (yoga of wisdom) is a singular path. When buddhi-yoga is seen to be limited by the ideal of action, it is known as karma-yoga; when it extends beyond action up to the peak of knowledge, it is known as jñāna-yoga or sāṅkhya-yoga; and when, transcending the limitations of both action and knowledge it touches bhakti or devotion, it is then known as bhakti-yoga, or perfectly pure and complete buddhi-yoga.”
—Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur
नेहाभिक्रमनाशोऽस्ति प्रत्यवायो न विद्यते ।स्वल्पमप्यस्य धर्म्मस्य त्रायते महतो भयात् ॥४०॥
nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti pratyavāyo na vidyatesvalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt [40]
iha–In this (bhakti-) yoga; na asti–there is no; abhikrama-nāśaḥ–failure in the beginning; na vidyate–and there is no; pratyavāyaḥ–diminution of results. svalpam api–Even the slightest practice; asya dharmasya–of this bhakti-yoga; trāyate–saves one; mahataḥ bhayāt–from the great fear of birth and death in the material world. [40]
40 On this path there can be no loss and no harm. The slightest practice of such a spiritual ideal saves one from the greatest fear.
Commentary
Mahābhay, the greatest fear, is generally considered to be the fear of repeated birth and death in this world. But mahābhay also refers to sāyujya-mukti, the liberation of merging into the impersonal non-differentiated consciousness of Brahmaloka, Virajā, or a kind of impersonal samādhi. Renunciation alone leads to sāyujya-mukti, the cessation of birth and death, but not to a life in the positive plane. It takes one to a permanent ‘burial’ in Brahmaloka. The demon of mukti will devour one wholesale, and therefore it is even more dangerous than this ordinary life of action and reaction. Mukti means a strike in the organic system, so it must be avoided. For example, to either ignore duties in a factory or to declare a strike by cessation of duties are both abnormal.
Bhukti, exploitation, and mukti, renunciation, are both fearsome ghosts. Therefore, here, mahābhay means the great apprehension of falling prey to both the ghost of exploitation leading to birth and death, as well as the ghost of committing suicide by merging into the impersonalism of incarceration in Brahmaloka—fear of both bhoga-bhūmi, the land of exploitation, and tyāga-bhūmi, the plane of renunciation. It is stated in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.22, 1.1.9):
भुक्तिमुक्तिस्पृहा यावत् पिशाची हृदि वर्त्तते ।तावद्भक्तिसुखस्यात्र कथमभ्युदयो भवेत् ॥
bhukti-mukti-spṛhā yāvat piśāchī hṛdi vartatetāvad bhakti-sukhasyātra katham abhyudayo bhavet
“The ecstasy of devotion to Kṛṣṇa will never appear in a heart that is haunted by the ghosts of exploitation and renunciation.”
अन्याभिलाषिता शून्यं ज्ञानकर्म्माद्यनावृतम् ।आनुकूल्येन कृष्णनुशीलनं भक्तरुत्तमा ॥
anyābhilāṣitā śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy anāvṛtamānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā
“The highest devotion is that which is cultivated for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, with no desire except to serve Him, and divested of all external attempts such as worldly action, knowledge in search of the impersonal Absolute, or the meditational attempt to become one with God.”
Only the Supreme Lord is abhay, beyond apprehension. Therefore nothing but participation in His service can free one from the ghosts of exploitation and renunciation, bhukti and mukti. If we subtract bhukti and mukti, then only positive bhakti, devotion, is the remainder. Therefore, without devotion, everything is mahābhay, great danger.
व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिरेकेह कुरुनन्दन ।बहुशाखा ह्यनन्ताश्च बुद्धयोऽव्यवसायिनाम् ॥४१॥
vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha kuru-nandanabahu-śākhā hy anantāś cha buddhayo ’vyavasāyinām [41]
(he) kuru-nandana–O Arjuna, descendant of the Kuru dynasty; vyavasāya-ātmikā buddhiḥ–the resolute intelligence; iha–to practise this (bhakti-) yoga; eka (eva)–is onepointed; (tu)–but; buddhayaḥ–the intelligence; avyavasāyinām–of the irresolute—those who nurture mundane desires; hi–is certainly; anantāḥ–endlessly; bahu-śākhāḥ cha–many-branched, splayed. [41]
41 O descendant of the Kuru dynasty, resolute intelligence dedicated to Me is one-pointed—I am its only objective. But irresolute intelligence is splayed by endless desires for mundane enjoyment.
यामिमां पुष्पितां वाच प्रवदन्त्यविपश्चितः ।वेदवादरताः पार्थ नान्यदस्तीति वादिनः ॥४२॥
yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vāchaṁ pravadanty avipaśchitaḥveda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha nānyad astīti vādinaḥ [42]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; avipaśchitaḥ–the unwise; veda-vāda-ratāḥ–who are fond of interpreting the Vedas, not knowing the true directive of the Vedas; vādinaḥ iti–say that; na asti–there is no; anyat–other (divine or controlling) principle beyond beasts, food, offspring, heaven, etc.; pravadanti–and they glorify as supreme; yām imām vācham–those statements which; puṣpitām–momentarily please the ear (which, thus taken out of context, are effectively poisonous as they do not help the spiritual progress of the soul). [42]
42 O Pārtha, unwise persons, not knowing that the chief directive of the Vedas is the attainment of the Supreme Truth, are fond of interpreting the fleetingly enchanting words of the karma-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas as ultimate.
कामात्मानः स्वर्गपराः जन्मकर्म्मफलप्रदाम् ।क्रियाविशेषबहुलां भोगैश्वर्य्यगतिं प्रति ॥४३॥
kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parāḥ janma-karma-phala-pradāmkriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati [43]
kāma-ātmānaḥ–Their hearts filled with selfish desires; svarga-parāḥ–heaven is their goal; kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulām–and they advocate the various ceremonies and rituals; janmakarma-phala-pradām–which yield high birth; bhoga-aiśvarya-gatim prati–and lead to enjoyment and opulence. [43]
43 Their hearts are filled with desires and their goal is heaven. They advocate the many sacrifices and rituals that yield wealth, worldly pleasures, and high birth.
भोगैश्वर्य्यप्रसक्तानां तयापहृतचेतसाम् ।व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिः समाधौ न विधीयते ॥४४॥
bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ tayāpahṛta-chetasāmvyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ samādhau na vidhīyate [44]
bhoga-aiśvarya-prasaktānām–Of those persons attached to enjoyment and opulence; apahṛta-chetasām–whose minds are deluded; tayā–by those flowery words of the Vedas; vyavasāya-ātmikā buddhiḥ–the resolve; samādhau–in dedication to the Supreme Lord; na vidhīyate–is not accomplished. [44]
44 Thus attached to enjoyment and opulence, deluded by these flowery words of the Vedas, they do not attain the resolve to dedicate themselves to the Supreme Lord.
त्रैगुण्यविषया वेदा निस्त्रैगुण्यो भवार्ज्जुन ।निर्द्वन्द्वो नित्यसत्त्वस्थो निर्योगक्षेम आत्मवान् ॥४५॥
traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjunanirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho niryoga-kṣema ātmavān [45]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; vedāḥ–the Vedas; trai-guṇya-viṣayāḥ–deal with the modes of material nature—worldly subjects. nirdvandvaḥ–Give up duality (honour and dishonour, etc., in the purview of these modes); nitya-sattva-sthaḥ–be always situated in the truth (or remain with the true devotees); niryoga-kṣemaḥ–free from acquisition and preservation; (cha)–and; ātmavān (san)–engaging in this buddhi-yoga, yoga of wisdom that I teach you; bhava–become; nistraiguṇyaḥ–transcendental to the three modes of material nature. [45]
45 O Arjuna, the Vedas deal with the three modes of material nature (by accommodating fruitive action and liberation as an allowance and incentive for persons who are ignorant of the true objective of the Vedas). But you, Arjuna, give up duality and all pursuits for gain and preservation, stand ever in the plane of truth, and by the yoga of wisdom, transcend the modes of nature.
(The objective of the Vedas is transcendental. Without fruitive action or liberation, O Arjuna, follow the transcendental path of devotion to the Lord as taught by the Vedas.)
यावानर्थ उदपाने सर्व्वतः सम्प्लुतोदके ।तावान्सर्व्वेषु वेदेषु ब्राह्मणस्य विजानतः ॥४६॥
yāvān artha udapāne sarvataḥ samplutodaketāvān sarveṣu vedeṣu brāhmaṇasya vijānataḥ [46]
yāvān arthaḥ–Of various purposes; (sidhyati)–achieved; udapāne–by a well or pond; tāvān (eva arthaḥ)–all the purposes; sarvataḥ–of all these wells; (sidhyati)–are achieved; (tato ’pi vaiśiṣṭyena)–better than that; sampluta-udake–by a large expanse of water, a lake. (evam)–Similarly; (yāvān arthaḥ sidhyati)–of the various purposes fulfilled; sarveṣu vedeṣu–by the prayers described in all the Vedas for worshipping the various demigods; (tāvān arthaḥ sidhyati)–those purposes are all fulfilled; (bhagavad ārādhane eva)–by worshipping the Supreme Lord; brāhmaṇasya vijānataḥ–for the brāhmaṇ who is in full knowledge that devotion to the Lord is the sole purport of the Vedas. [46]
46 As all the purposes served by several ponds can be served better by a large lake, similarly, the fruits of worshipping the various gods by their respective Vedic prayers are surpassed by serving Me. The knower of Brahma who thus knows the purport of the Vedas fulfils all life’s objectives.
कर्म्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन ।मा कर्म्मफलहेतुर्भूर्मा ते सङ्गोऽस्त्वकर्म्मणि ॥४७॥
karmaṇy evādhikāras te mā phaleṣu kadāchanamā karma-phala-hetur bhūr mā te saṅgo ’stv akarmaṇi [47]
te–Your; adhikāraḥ–right; eva karmaṇi–is to perform your prescribed duties; mā kadāchana (bhūḥ)–but never; phaleṣu–to the results. mā bhūḥ–Be neither; karma-phala-hetuḥ–motivated by the fruits of action; mā–nor; astu–may; akarmaṇi–non-performance of your prescribed duties; (bhūḥ)–be; te–your; saṅgaḥ–inclination. [47]
47 Your right is to your work, never to the fruits. Be neither motivated by the fruit of action nor inclined to give up action.
योगस्थः कुरु कर्म्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा धनञ्जय ।सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समो भूत्वा समत्वं योग उच्यते ॥४८॥
yoga-sthaḥ kuru karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā dhanañjayasiddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā samatvaṁ yoga uchyate [48]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Arjuna; yoga-sthaḥ–stand in yoga; tyaktvā–giving up; saṅgam–ego; samaḥ bhūtvā–and being equipoised; siddhi-asiddhyoḥ–in success and failure; kuru–do; karmāṇi–your duties; (yataḥ)–as; samatvam–such equanimity; uchyate–is called; yogaḥ–yoga. [48]
48 O Dhanañjaya, give up the ego that you are the doer, and be equipoised in success and failure. Thus stand firm in the plane of yoga and do your prescribed duties. Such a state of balance is indeed known as yoga.
दूरेण ह्यवरं कर्म्म बुद्धियोगाद्धनञ्जय ।बुद्धौ शरणमन्विच्छ कृपणाः फलहेतवः ॥४९॥
dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma buddhi-yogād dhanañjayabuddhau śaraṇam anvichchha kṛpaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ [49]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Dhanañjaya; karma hi–action alone; dūreṇa avaram–is far inferior; buddhi-yogāt–to the yoga of wisdom; (ataḥ)–therefore; anvichchha–seek; śaraṇam–refuge; buddhau–in the wisdom of equanimity. phala-hetavaḥ–Those motivated by the fruits of their actions; kṛpaṇāḥ–are misers. [49]
49 O Dhanañjaya, (fruitive) action is far inferior to this yoga of wisdom; those motivated by the fruits of their actions are misers. Therefore, seek refuge in the selfless wisdom of equanimity.
बुद्धियुक्तो जहातीह उभे सुकृतदुष्कृते ।तस्माद्योगाय युज्यस्व योगः कर्म्मसु कौशलम् ॥५०॥
buddhi-yukto jahātīha ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛtetasmād yogāya yujyasva yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam [50]
buddhi-yuktaḥ–The wise person; jahāti–abstains; ubhe–from both; sukṛta-duṣkṛte–pious and sinful actions; iha–in this world. tasmāt–Therefore; yujyasva–engage; yogāya–in yoga. yogaḥ–Yoga; kauśalam–is the expertise; karmasu–of action. [50]
50 The wise person abstains from both good and bad actions in this world. Engage thus in yoga, as yoga is the art of all works.
कर्म्मजं बुद्धियुक्ता हि फलं त्यक्त्वा मनीषिणः ।जन्मबन्धविनिर्म्मुक्ताः पदं गच्छन्त्यनामयम् ॥५१॥
karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥjanma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ padaṁ gachchhanty anāmayam [51]
hi–Since; tyaktvā–by giving up; phalam–the fruits; karma-jam–born of work; buddhi-yuktāḥ–the wise; manīṣiṇaḥ (santaḥ)–are enlightened; janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ (santaḥ)–and attaining liberation from the bondage of birth; gachchhanti–attain; padam–the plane; anāmayam–beyond suffering. [51]
51 The wise are enlightened by giving up the fruits of their actions, and thus attaining liberation from the bondage of birth, they reach the plane beyond all suffering.
यदा ते मोहकलिलं बुद्धिर्व्यतितरिष्यति ।तदा गन्तासि निर्व्वेदं श्रोतव्यस्य श्रुतस्य च ॥५२॥
yadā te moha-kalilaṁ buddhir vyatitariṣyatitadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ śrotavyasya śrutasya cha [52]
yadā–When; te–your; buddhiḥ–intelligence; vyatitariṣyati–overcomes; moha-kalilam–the strong illusion (of bodily identification); tadā–then; (tvam) gantāsi–you will attain; nirvedam–indifference; śrotavyasya–of all to be heard; śrutasya cha–and already heard. [52]
52 When your intelligence fully emerges from the dense forest of illusion, you will be indifferent to all that has been heard or is yet to be heard.
श्रुतिविप्रतिपन्ना ते यदा स्थास्यति निश्चला ।समाधावचला बुद्धिस्तदा योगमवाप्स्यसि ॥५३॥
śruti-vipratipannā te yadā sthāsyati niśchalāsamādhāv achalā buddhis tadā yogam avāpsyasi [53]
yadā–When; te buddhiḥ–your intelligence; achalā–unmoved; śruti-vipratipannā–by the apparent contradictions of the Vedas; sthāsyati–remains; niśchalā samādhau–steadily absorbed in consciousness of the Supreme; tadā–then; avāpsyasi–you will attain; yogam–yoga. [53]
53 You shall attain perfect yoga or pure devotion when your intelligence, undisturbed by the apparent contradictions of the Vedas, abides in the Lord.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
स्थितप्रज्ञस्य का भाषा समाधिस्थस्य केशव ।स्थितधीः किं प्रभाषेत किमासीत व्रजेत किम् ॥५४॥
arjuna uvācha
sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā samādhi-sthasya keśavasthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta kim āsīta vrajeta kim [54]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) keśava–O Keśava; kā bhāṣā–what is the description; sthita-prajñasya–of a person of firmly established wisdom; samādhi-sthasya–one in samādhi, absorbed in thought of the Supreme? sthita-dhīḥ kim prabhāṣeta–How does such a person of steady mind speak? kim āsīta kim vrajeta–How does he be and act? [54]
54 Arjuna said: O Keśava, what are the characteristics of the person of firmly established wisdom, who is fully absorbed in consciousness of the Supreme (samādhi)? How does such a man of steady mind speak, be, and act in this world?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
प्रजहाति यदा कामान्सर्व्वान्पार्थ मनोगतान् ।आत्मन्येवात्मना तुष्टः स्थितप्रज्ञस्तदोच्यते ॥५५॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
prajahāti yadā kāmān sarvān pārtha mano-gatānātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ sthita-prajñas tadochyate [55]
śri bhagavān uvācha–Śrī Kṛṣṇa said: (he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; yadā–when; (jīvaḥ)–the living being; prajahāti–gives up; sarvān–all; kāmān–desires; manaḥ-gatān–entering the mind; tuṣṭaḥ (bhavati)–and is content; ātmanā eva–by the self; ātmani–within the self; tadā–then; (saḥ)–that person; uchyate–is said to be; sthita-prajñaḥ–of steady intelligence. [55]
55 The Supreme Lord said: O Pārtha, one who rejects all desires that enter the mind and remains self-satisfied within is known as a person whose wisdom is firmly established.
दुःखेष्वनुद्विग्नमनाः सुखेषु विगतस्पृहः ।वीतरागभयक्रोधः स्थितधीर्मुनिरुच्यते ॥५६॥
duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥvīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ sthita-dhīr munir uchyate [56]
anudvigna-manāḥ–One whose mind is undisturbed; duḥkheṣu–by sorrow; vigata-spṛhaḥ sukheṣu–and whose hankering for pleasure has gone; (cha)–and; vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ–who is free from attachment, fear, and anger; (saḥ eva)–such a person; uchyate–is said to be; muniḥ–a silent sage; sthita-dhīḥ–of steady intelligence. [56]
56 One who is undisturbed by sorrow, whose hankering for pleasure has gone, and who is free from attachment, fear, and anger, is known as a silent sage of steady mind.
यः सर्व्वत्रानभिस्नेहस्तत्तत्प्राप्य शुभाशुभम् ।नाभिनन्दति न द्वेष्टि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता ॥५७॥
yaḥ sarvatrānabhisnehas tat tat prāpya śubhāśubhamnābhinandati na dveṣṭi tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā [57]
yaḥ–One who; anabhisnehaḥ–is without attachment; sarvatra–for anything in this world; na abhinandati–neither joyful; na dveṣṭi–nor resentful; prāpya–in the event of; śubha-aśubham–auspiciousness or inauspiciousness; tat tat–respectively; tasya–his; prajñā–wisdom; pratiṣṭhitā–is firmly established. [57]
57 One who is not attached to anything in this world, who neither enjoys nor resents auspiciousness or inauspiciousness—his wisdom is firmly established.
यदा संहरते चायं कूर्म्मोऽङ्गानीव सर्व्वशः ।इन्द्रियाणीन्द्रियार्थेभ्यस्तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता ॥५८॥
yadā saṁharate chāyaṁ kūrmo ’ṅgānīva sarvaśaḥindriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā [58]
yadā cha–When; ayam–this person; sarvaśaḥ–completely; saṁharate–withdraws; kūrmaḥ aṅgāni iva–like the limbs of a tortoise; indriyāṇi–the perceptual senses; indriya-arthebhyaḥ–from their objects (sound, touch, form, taste, and smell); (tadā)–then; tasya–his; prajñā–wisdom; pratiṣṭhitā–is firmly established. [58]
58 When one’s senses are controlled and totally withdrawn from their objects, like the limbs of the tortoise withdrawn in its shell, his wisdom is firmly established.
विषया विनिवर्त्तन्ते निराहारस्य देहिनः ।रसवर्ज्जं रसोऽप्यस्य परं दृष्ट्वा निवर्त्तते ॥५९॥
viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥrasa-varjaṁ raso ’py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [59]
dehinaḥ–For the embodied; nirāhārasya–who restricts the senses; viṣayāḥ–the objects of the senses; vinivartante–recede; rasa-varjam–but not the taste to enjoy them. rasaḥ api–But even the taste; nivartate–disappears; asya–for the man of wisdom; dṛṣṭvā–by the vision; param–of the Supreme. [59]
59 The embodied being may renounce the sense objects, but the taste for them remains. But that, too, vanishes for the man of wisdom, by his vision of the Supreme.
यततो ह्यपि कौन्तेय पुरुषस्य विपश्चितः ।इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाथीनि हरन्ति प्रसभं मनः ॥६०॥
yatato hy api kaunteya puruṣasya vipaśchitaḥindriyāṇi pramāthīni haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ [60]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna; hi–yet; indriyāṇi pramāthīni–the turbulent senses; prasabham–forcibly; haranti–snatch away; manaḥ–the mind; vipaśchitaḥ puruṣasya api–of even the wise person; yatataḥ–striving for liberation. [60]
60 And yet, O son of Kuntī, the turbulent senses can forcibly plunder the mind of even the wise person striving for liberation.
तानि सर्व्वाणि संयम्य युक्त आसीत मत्परः ।वशे हि यस्येन्द्रियाणि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता ॥६१॥
tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya yukta āsīta mat-paraḥvaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā [61]
saṁyamya–Controlling; tāni sarvāṇi–all these senses; mat-paraḥ–the person absorbed in consciousness of Me, devoted to Me; yuktaḥ āsīta–should remain one-pointed in concentration; hi–for; yasya–he whose; indriyāṇi–senses; vaśe–have been brought under control; tasya–his; prajñā–intelligence; pratiṣṭhitā–is steady. [61]
61 Devoted to Me, the bhakti-yogī brings his senses under proper control. Firmly established is the wisdom of one whose senses are controlled.
ध्यायतो विषयान्पुंसः सङ्गस्तेषूपजायते ।सङ्गात्सञ्जायते कामः कामात्क्रोधोऽभिजायते ॥६२॥
dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ saṅgas teṣūpajāyatesaṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate [62]
dhyāyataḥ–(Otherwise, without devotion, renunciation alone fails:) By thinking of; viṣayān–the objects of the senses; puṁsaḥ–a person’s; saṅgaḥ–attachment; teṣu–to them; upajāyate–is born. saṅgāt–From attachment; kāmaḥ–desire; sañjāyate–is born. kāmāt–From desire; krodhaḥ–anger; abhijāyate–arises. [62]
62 But one whose thoughts dwell on the objects of the senses becomes attached to them. From attachment, desire is born, and from desire, anger arises.
क्रोधाद्भवति सम्मोहः सम्मोहात्स्मृतिविभ्रमः ।स्मृतिभ्रंशाद्बुद्धिनाशो बुद्धिनाशात्प्रणश्यति ॥६३॥
krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥsmṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati [63]
krodhāt–From anger; saṁmohaḥ–delusion; bhavati–occurs. saṁmohāt–From delusion; smṛti-vibhramaḥ–forgetfulness of scriptural morality; (bhavati)–occurs. smṛti-bhraṁ śāt–From forgetfulness; buddhi-nāśaḥ–loss of truth-seeking intelligence; (bhavati)–occurs. buddhi-nāśāt–From loss of intelligence; (pumān)–a person; praṇaśyati–falls into saṁsāra, the cycle of birth and death in the material world. [63]
63 Anger gives rise to delusion, and the power of delusion causes forgetfulness; forgetfulness destroys the intelligence, and when the intelligence is lost, one loses all.
रागद्वेषविमुक्तैस्तु विषयानिन्द्रियैश्चरन् ।आत्मवश्यैर्विधेयात्मा प्रसादमधिगच्छति ॥६४॥
rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu viṣayān indriyaiś charanātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā prasādam adhigachchhati [64]
tu–But; vidheya-ātmā–the person who can control his mind at will—whose mind is obedient to him; rāga-dveṣa-vimuktaiḥ (or -viyuktaiḥ in another reading)–free from attraction and repulsion, adopting yukta-vairāgya or devotionally integrated detachment; charan–actively accepting; viṣayān–objects; ātma-vaśyaiḥ indriyaiḥ–through senses under his own control; adhigachchhati–attains; prasādam–tranquillity. [64]
64 But the integrated person who can control his mind at will, and who, free from attraction and repulsion, accepts his worldly necessities through his controlled senses, attains tranquillity.
प्रसादे सर्व्वदुःखानां हानिरस्योपजायते ।प्रसन्नचेतसो ह्यशु बुद्धिः पर्य्यवतिष्ठते ॥६५॥
prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir asyopajāyateprasanna-chetaso hy āśu buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate [65]
prasāde (sati)–When the heart is tranquil; asya–for such a person; hāniḥ–the end; sarva-duḥkhānām–of all sorrows; upajāyate–occurs; hi–since; buddhiḥ–the wisdom; prasanna-chetasaḥ–of the peaceful-hearted person; āśu–swiftly becomes; pari-avatiṣṭhate–steadfast. [65]
65 When one attains a peaceful heart, all his sorrows are dispelled. The tranquil person’s wisdom swiftly becomes steadfast.
नास्ति बुद्धिरयुक्तस्य न चायुक्तस्य भावना ।न चाभावयतः शान्तिरशान्तस्य कुतः सुखम् ॥६६॥
nāsti buddhir ayuktasya na chāyuktasya bhāvanāna chābhāvayataḥ śāntir aśāntasya kutaḥ sukham [66]
ayuktasya–For a person without self-control; na asti–there is no; buddhiḥ–wisdom, self-knowledge. ayuktasya–For such a person devoid of this intelligence; na cha (asti)–there is no; bhāvanā–meditation on the Lord, purity of thought. abhāvayataḥ–For one without meditation; na cha (asti)–there is no; śāntiḥ–peace. aśāntasya–For a person who has no peace; kutaḥ–where is; sukham–happiness? [66]
66 A person bereft of self-control can have neither wisdom nor meditation. Without meditation there is no peace, and without peace, where is the hope for happiness?
इन्द्रियाणां हि चरतां यन्मनोऽनुविधीयते ।तदस्य हरति प्रज्ञां वायुर्नावमिवाम्भसि ॥६७॥
indriyāṇāṁ hi charatāṁ yan mano ’nuvidhīyatetad asya harati prajñāṁ vāyur nāvam ivāmbhasi [67]
hi–Because; iva–as; vāyuḥ–an unfavourable wind; (harati)–carries away; nāvam–a boat; ambhasi–on the ocean; (tadvat)–similarly; indriyāṇām–of the senses; charatāṁ–that wander about their objects; yat–whichever sense; manaḥ–the mind; anuvidhīyate–follows; tat–that sense; harati–carries away, lures towards its object; prajñām–the wisdom, intelligence; asya–of that person bereft of self-control. [67]
67 As a boat on the ocean is thrown off course by an unfavourable wind, similarly, the wisdom of a person lacking self-control is carried away by even one of the roaming senses that the mind might follow.
तस्माद्यस्य महाबाहो निगृहीतानि सर्व्वशः ।इन्द्रियाणीन्द्रियार्थेभ्यस्तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता ॥६८॥
tasmād yasya mahā-bāho nigṛhītāni sarvaśaḥindriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā [68]
(he) mahā-bāho–O subduer of the enemy; tasmāt–therefore; yasya–he whose; indriyāṇi–senses; nigṛhītāni–are withdrawn; sarvaśaḥ–fully; indriya-arthebhyaḥ–from the sense objects; tasya–his; prajñā–wisdom; pratiṣṭhitā–is firmly established. [68]
68 Therefore, O subduer of the enemy, one whose senses are fully withdrawn from their objects is a person of firmly established wisdom.
या निशा सर्व्वभूतानां तस्यां जागर्त्ति संयमी ।यस्यां जाग्रति भूतानि सा निशा पश्यतो मुनेः ॥६९॥
yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamīyasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni sā niśā paśyato muneḥ [69]
sarva-bhūtānām yā niśā–That which is night for all living beings (who, immersed in ignorance, remain asleep to spiritual knowledge); tasyām–in that night; saṁyamī–the self-disciplined person; jāgarti–remains awake (joyful in his spiritual intelligence). yasyām–That (mundane intelligence) in which; bhūtāni–all living beings; jāgrati–remain awake (experience the pleasures and pains, sorrows and delusions of worldly life); sā–such (mundane intelligence) is; niśā–night; muneḥ–for the sage; paśyataḥ–who sees (the futility of mundane endeavours and remains indifferent to the dualities). [69]
69 That which is day for the self-controlled sage is night for all beings, and that which is day for all beings is night for the sage who sees. (The living beings absorbed in mundane life are asleep to the spiritual joy of the realised soul, who remains indifferent to their quest for the pleasures of the senses, devoid of spiritual joy.)
आपूर्य्यमाणमचलप्रतिष्ठंसमुद्रमापः प्रविशन्ति यद्वत् ।तद्वत्कामा यं प्रविशन्ति सर्व्वेस शान्तिमाप्नोति न कामकामी ॥७०॥
āpūryamāṇam achala-pratiṣṭhaṁsamudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvattadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarvesa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī [70]
yadvat–As; āpaḥ–water; praviśanti–enters; samudram–the ocean; āpūryamāṇam–which is always full; achala-pratiṣṭham–it remains steady, its water never crossing the shore; tadvat–similar is; yam–that sage who; sarve kāmāḥ–all desires; praviśanti–enter to be enjoyed (for they cannot disturb his mind). saḥ–He alone; āpnoti–attains; śāntim–peace; (tu)–but; kāma-kāmī–a person who nurtures desires; na (tad āpnoti)–cannot achieve that. [70]
70 As the ocean remains full and unchanged though many rivers and streams enter into it, the person of firmly established wisdom attains peace despite all desires entering him. But a person who nurtures desires cannot know peace.
विहाय कामान्यः सर्व्वान्पुमांश्चरति निःस्पृहः ।निर्म्ममो निरहङ्कारः स शान्तिमधिगच्छति ॥७१॥
vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān pumāṁś charati niḥspṛhaḥnirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ sa śāntim adhigachchhati [71]
yaḥ pumān–That person who; vihāya–giving up; sarvān kāmān–all desires; charati–moves through the world; nispṛhaḥ–free from hankering; nirahaṅkāraḥ nirmamaḥ–free from the false ego of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ in relation to the body and its attachments (having a divine relationship with the Supreme); saḥ–he; adhigachchhati–attains; śāntim–peace. [71]
71 Only a person who lives his life abandoning all desires, hankering, ego and possessiveness, can know real peace.
एषा ब्राह्मी स्थितिः पार्थ नैनां प्राप्य विमुह्यति ।स्थित्वास्यामन्तकालेऽपि ब्रह्मनिर्व्वाणमृच्छति ॥७२॥
eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha naināṁ prāpya vimuhyatisthitvāsyām anta-kāle ’pi brahma-nirvāṇam ṛchchhati [72]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; eṣā brahmī sthitiḥ–this is the state of realising Brahma, the Absolute. enām prāpya–Having reached this; (naraḥ)–a person; na vimuhyati–is freed from the delusion of mundane existence. ṛchchhati–He attains; brahma-nirvāṇam–liberation from matter and entrance into the divine plane; sthitvā–being situated; asyām–in this state; anta-kāle api–even at the time of death. [72]
72 O Pārtha, this is realisation of the Absolute, attaining which a person is freed from the delusion of mundane existence. Even at the time of death, only a momentary attainment of this state leads one to the divine abode.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे साङ्ख्य योगो नाम द्वितोयोऽध्यायः ॥२॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahma-vidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvādesāṅkhya-yogo nāma dvitīyo ’dhyāyaḥ [2]
End of Chapter TwoThe Contitution Of The Soulfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Chapter Three Karma-yoga The Path of Action
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
ज्यायसी चेत्कर्म्मणस्ते मता बुद्धिर्जनार्द्दन ।तत्किं कर्म्मणि घोरे मां नियोजयसि केशव ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
jyāyasī chet karmaṇas te matā buddhir janārdanatat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ niyojayasi keśava [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) janārdana–O Janārdan; (he) keśava–O Keśava; chet–if; te matā–it is Your opinion that; buddhiḥ–wisdom; jyāyasī–is superior; karmaṇaḥ–to action; tat kim–why, then; niyojayasi mām–do You urge me to engage; ghore karmaṇi–in the terrible action of warfare? [1]
1 Arjuna said: O Janārdan, O Keśava, if You consider wisdom superior to action, why, then, do you urge me to engage in the violence of warfare?
व्यामिश्रेणेव वाक्येन बुद्धिं मोहयसीव मे ।तदेकं वद निश्चत्य येन श्रेयोऽहमाप्नुयाम् ॥२॥
vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena buddhiṁ mohayasīva metad ekaṁ vada niśchitya yena śreyo ’ham āpnuyām [2]
mohayasi iva–You are bewildering; me–my; buddhim–intelligence; vākyena–by Your words; vyāmiśreṇa iva–by their ambiguous meanings, sometimes praising action and sometimes praising wisdom. tat–Therefore; niśchitya–ascertaining; ekam–one; vada–please say; yena–that by which; aham–I; āpnuyām–can obtain; śreyaḥ–the highest benefit. [2]
2 I am confused by Your words. They appear to be ambiguous, sometimes supporting action and sometimes supporting wisdom. So please tell me, which is the most beneficial path for me to take?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
लोकेऽस्मिन्द्विविधा निष्ठा पुरा प्रोक्ता मयानघ ।ज्ञानयोगेन साङ्ख्यानां कर्म्मयोगेन योगिनाम् ॥३॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
loke ’smin dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā purā proktā mayānaghajñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ karma-yogena yoginām [3]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Lord said: (he) anagha–O sinless Arjuna; asmin loke–in this world; dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā–two ways; proktā–have been spoken of; mayā–by Me; purā–in the previous chapter: (niṣṭhā sthāpitā)–the established practice; sāṅkhyānām–of the realised; jñāna-yogena–by the yoga of knowledge; (niṣṭhā sthāpitā)–and the established practice; yoginām–of those engaged in action in the world; karma-yogena–by the yoga of selfless action. [3]
3 The Supreme Lord replied: O sinless one, I have described the two paths to be found in this world—the yoga of wisdom practised by the realised and the yoga of selfless action practised by those active in the world. (Both paths touch the beginnings of devotional practice since the ladder to the plane of devotion is one, while the practice is twofold according to the stage attained.)
न कर्म्मणामनारम्भान्नैष्कर्म्म्यं पुरुषोऽश्नुते ।न च सन्न्यसनादेव सिद्धिं समधिगच्छति ॥४॥
na karmaṇām anārambhān naiṣkarmyaṁ puruṣo ’śnutena cha sannyasanād eva siddhiṁ samadhigachchhati [4]
puruṣaḥ–A person; na aśnute–cannot attain; naiṣkarmyam–to the state of spiritual consciousness beyond material activity; anārambhāt–by refraining from; karmaṇām–(scripturally prescribed) actions; na samadhigachchhati–and he cannot attain; siddhim–fulfillment, perfection; sannyasanāt eva cha–by renunciation alone. [4]
4 One cannot attain freedom from action by refraining from action. Nor can one attain fulfillment by renunciation alone.
न हि कश्चत्क्षणमपि जातु तिष्ठत्यकर्म्मकृत् ।कार्य्यते ह्यवशः कर्म्म सर्व्वः प्रकृतिजैर्गुणैः ॥५॥
na hi kaśchit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarmakṛtkāryate hy avaśaḥ karma sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ [5]
kaśchit–One; na hi tiṣṭhati–cannot remain; jātu–at any time; akarma-kṛt–without engaging in activity; kṣaṇam api–even for a moment. sarvaḥ hi–Indeed, all living beings; avaśaḥ–are helplessly; karma kāryate–engaged in activity; prakṛti-jaiḥ guṇaiḥ–by the modes or qualities born of material nature. [5]
5 No one can refrain from activity for even a moment. Everyone is impelled to act by the modes of material nature. (Thus the person of impure consciousness should not disregard scripturally prescribed purificatory works.)
कर्म्मेन्द्रियाणि संयम्य य आस्ते मनसा स्मरन् ।इन्द्रियार्थान्विमूढात्मा मिथ्याचारः स उच्यते ॥६॥
karmendriyāṇi saṁyamya ya āste manasā smaranindriyārthān vimūḍhātmā mithyāchāraḥ sa uchyate [6]
yaḥ–That person who; saṁyamya–having controlled; karma-indriyāṇi–the senses of action—the hands, legs, etc. (see 13.6); smaran āste–remembers, dwells on; indriya-arthān–the sense objects; manasā–within his mind; saḥ–that person; uchyate–is known as; vimūḍha-ātmā–a fool; mithyā-āchāraḥ–and a hypocrite. [6]
6 One who externally restrains his hands, legs, and other senses of action, but whose mind dwells on sense objects, is a fool. Know him to be a hypocrite.
यस्त्वन्द्रियाणि मनसा नियम्यारभतेऽर्ज्जुन ।कर्म्मेन्द्रियैः कर्म्मयोगमसक्तः स विशिष्यते ॥७॥
yas tv indriyāṇi manasā niyamyārabhate ’rjunakarmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam asaktaḥ sa viśiṣyate [7]
(he) arjuna–O Dhanañjaya; yaḥ tu–but he, who; niyamya–having stabilised; indriyāṇi–the senses; manasā–by the mind; ārabhate–engages in; karma-yogam–the yoga of action as directed by the scriptures; karma-indriyaiḥ–utilising the senses of action; asaktaḥ–without any desire for the results; saḥ–that person; viśiṣyate–is superior to such a hypocrite. [7]
7 O Arjuna, superior is one who (though married) has stabilised his senses by the mind and engaged in the yoga of selfless action.
नियतं कुरु कर्म्म त्वं कर्म्म ज्यायो ह्यकर्म्मणः ।शरीरयात्रापि च ते न प्रसिद्ध्येदकर्म्मणः ॥८॥
niyataṁ kuru karma tvaṁ karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥśarīra-yātrāpi cha te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ [8]
tvam–You; kuru–perform; niyatam karma–prescribed duties; hi–since; karma–the performance of duty; jyāyaḥ–is superior; akarmaṇaḥ–to renouncing duty. akarmaṇaḥ cha–By becoming inactive; te śarīra yātrā api–even your bodily sustenance; na prasiddhyet–will not be accomplished. [8]
8 Perform your prescribed duties, since to be active is better than idleness. Inactive persons cannot even maintain their existence. (By giving up fruitive action and performing your obligatory duties, your heart will be purified. Surpassing the plane of renunciation, you will attain pure devotion, transcendental to the mundane plane.)
यज्ञार्थात्कर्म्मणोऽन्यत्र लोकोऽयं कर्म्मबन्धनः ।तदर्थं कर्म्म कौन्तेय मुक्तसङ्गः समाचर ॥९॥
yajñārthāt karmaṇo ’nyatra loko ’yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥtad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya mukta-saṅgaḥ samāchara [9]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna; ayam lokaḥ–all the living beings of this world; karma-bandhanaḥ (bhavati)–come into bondage by their action; karmaṇaḥ anyatra–other than action; yajña-arthāt–as selfless duty offered to Lord Viṣṇu. (ataḥ)–Therefore; mukta-saṅgaḥ (san)–being free from attachment; karma samāchara–be fully active; tat-artham–for the purpose of such sacrifice, for Him. [9]
9 Selfless duty performed as an offering to the Supreme Lord is called yajña, or sacrifice. O Arjuna, all action performed for any other purpose is the cause of bondage in this world of repeated birth and death. Therefore, remaining unattached to the fruits of action, perform all your duties in the spirit of such sacrifice. (Such selfless action is the way to begin devotional practice, gradually realise the presence of the Lord, and ultimately attain pure devotion transcendental to the modes of material nature [nirguṇa bhakti]).
सहयज्ञाः प्रजाः सृष्ट्वा पुरोवाच प्रजापतिः ।अनेन प्रसविष्यध्वमेष वोऽस्त्विष्टकामधुक् ॥१०॥
saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā purovācha prajāpatiḥanena prasaviṣyadhvam eṣa vo ’stv iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk [10]
purā–At the universal manifestation; sṛṣṭvā–after manifesting; saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ–the progeny of the world, with sacrifices for Lord Viṣṇu; prajāpatiḥ–Lord Brahmā; uvācha–said: prasaviṣyadhvam–“May your prosperity flourish; anena–by this religious practice. eṣaḥ astu–May this sacrifice be; vaḥ–your; iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk–bestower of desired objects.” [10]
10 In the beginning, Lord Brahmā manifested the progeny of the world, along with sacrifices. He instructed them thus: “Take shelter of this religious principle of sacrifice; prosper and flourish. May such sacrifice be the bestower of the things you desire.”
देवान्भावयतानेन ते देवा भावयन्तु वः ।परस्परं भावयन्तः श्रेयः परमवाप्स्यथ ॥११॥
devān bhāvayatānena te devā bhāvayantu vaḥparasparaṁ bhāvayantaḥ śreyaḥ param avāpsyatha [11]
anena–“By this yajña; (yūjam)–you all; bhāvayata–propitiate; devān–the demigods; te devāḥ (api)–and the demigods being thus pleased; bhāvayantu vaḥ–may bestow upon you your desired fruits. (evam)–In this way; parasparam–mutually; bhāvayantaḥ–nourished; avāpsyatha–you will obtain; param śreyaḥ–the ultimate auspiciousness.” [11]
11 “Propitiate the gods by sacrifices, and may they satisfy you by bestowing your desired fruits. In this way, through mutual nourishment, you will be the gainers of great auspiciousness.”
इष्टान्भोगान्हि वो देवा दास्यन्ते यज्ञभाविताः ।तैर्दत्तानप्रदायैभ्यो यो भुङ्क्ते स्तेन एव सः ॥१२॥
iṣṭān bhogān hi vo devā dāsyante yajña-bhāvitāḥtair dattān apradāyaibhyo yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ [12]
devāḥ–The demigods (as limbs of My universal form); yajña-bhāvitāḥ (santaḥ)–being pleased by sacrifices; dāsyante–will bestow; vaḥ–upon you; iṣṭān bhogān–desired enjoyable objects. hi–Therefore; yaḥ–he who; bhuṅkte–enjoys; taiḥ dattān–food provided by the demigods; (vṛṣṭyādi dvāreṇa)–via the rain, etc.; apradāya–without making any offerings (of that food); (pañcha-yajña-ādhibhiḥ)–by means of the five kinds of sacrifices, etc.; ebhyaḥ–to those demigods, who are all under My shelter; saḥ–that person; stenaḥ eva–is but a thief. [12]
12 Propitiated by sacrifices, the gods (My worldly representatives) will bestow upon you all your desired enjoyable things. But one who enjoys what is given by the gods without offering it to them, is a thief.
यज्ञशिष्टाशिनः सन्तो मुच्यन्ते सर्व्वकिल्बिषैः ।भुञ्जते ते त्वघं पापा ये पचन्त्यात्मकारणात् ॥१३॥
yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo muchyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥbhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā ye pachanty ātma-kāraṇāt [13]
santaḥ–Virtuous persons; yajña-śiṣṭa-aśinaḥ–who partake of the remnants of sacrifice to the demigods (universal administrators subordinate to the Lord); muchyante–are liberated; sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ–from all sin (pañcha-sūnā, five types of sin due to five kinds of violence to other living beings). ye tu–But those who; pachanti–cook; ātma-kāraṇāt–for their own pleasure; te–those; pāpāḥ–sinful persons; bhuñjate–eat; (eva)–only; agham–sin. [13]
13 By accepting sacrificial remnants of the universal gods*, virtuous persons are liberated from all sins arising from violence towards other living entities. But those who prepare food for their own pleasure partake only of sin.
* The remnants referred to here are not the same as the Kṛṣṇa-prasād (food that has been offered to the Supreme Lord by His devotees). See 9.20–26.
अन्नाद्भवन्ति भूतानि पर्ज्जन्यादन्नसम्भवः ।यज्ञाद्भवति पर्ज्जन्यो यज्ञः कर्म्मसमुद्भवः ॥१४॥
annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥyajñād bhavati parjanyo yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ [14]
annāt–From food (transformed into semen and blood); bhūtāni–(the physical bodies of) all living entities; bhavanti–are manifest. anna-sambhavaḥ–Food is manifest; parjanyāt–due to rainfall. parjanyaḥ–Rainfall; bhavati–occurs; yajñāt–due to yajña, sacrifice. yajñaḥ–Sacrifice; karma-samudbhavaḥ–is born of action. [14]
14 The living beings’ bodies are manifest from food, food is manifest due to rain, rainfall ensues from the performance of sacrifice, and action is the cause of sacrifice.
कर्म्म ब्रह्मोद्भवं विद्धि ब्रह्माक्षरसमुद्भवम् ।तस्मात्सर्व्वगतं ब्रह्म नित्यं यज्ञे प्रतिष्ठितम् ॥१५॥
karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi brahmākṣara-samudbhavamtasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam [15]
viddhi–Know that; karma–action; brahma-udbhavam–is born of the Vedas. brahma–The Vedas; akṣara-samudbhavam–are born of Akṣara, the Imperishable. tasmāt–Therefore; sarva-gatam–the all-pervading; brahma–Supreme Lord; nityam pratiṣthitam–is always situated; yajñe–within sacrifice. [15]
15 Action is prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas originate in Akṣara, the Imperishable. Therefore, the all-pervading, imperishable Lord is ever present within the acts of sacrifice offered to Him.
एवं प्रवर्त्तितं चक्रं नानुवर्त्तयतीह यः ।अघायुरिन्द्रियारामो मोघं पार्थ स जीवति ॥१६॥
evaṁ pravartitaṁ chakraṁ nānuvartayatīha yaḥaghāyur indriyārāmo moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati [16]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; yaḥ–one who; iha–in this life; na anuvartayati–does not follow; chakram–the cycle; evam pravartitam–thus established in the nature of cause and effect; (parama-puruṣeṇa)–by the Supreme Personality; saḥ–he; jīvati–lives; agha-āyuḥ–a life of sin; indriya-ārāmaḥ–enjoying the senses; mogham–in vain. [16]
16 O Arjuna, one who does not respect this natural causal cycle leads a life of sin, enjoying the senses in vain.
यस्त्वात्मरतिरेव स्यादात्मतृप्तश्च मानवः ।आत्मन्येव च सन्तुष्टस्तस्य कार्य्यं न विद्यते ॥१७॥
yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād ātma-tṛptaś cha mānavaḥātmany eva cha santuṣṭas tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate [17]
tu–But; yah mānavaḥ–that man who; syāt–is; ātma-ratiḥ–internally ecstatic; ātma-tṛptaḥ eva cha–internally satiated; cha–and; santuṣṭaḥ–fully satisfied; ātmani eva–in the self alone; tasya–his; kāryam–duties; na vidyate–are none. [17]
17 Yet there is no duty to fulfill for the realised person who delights within the self, being fully satisfied within. (His only worldly action or karma is as required for his subsistence.)
नैव तस्य कृतेनार्थो नाकृतेनेह कश्चन ।न चास्य सर्व्वभूतेषु कश्चदर्थव्यपाश्रयः ॥१८॥
naiva tasya kṛtenārtho nākṛteneha kaśchanana chāsya sarva-bhūteṣu kaśchid artha-vyapāśrayaḥ [18]
iha–In this world; tasya–for that ātmārāma, one who delights in the self; arthaḥ na eva–no piety is gained; kṛtena–by action; kaśchana (anārthaḥ) na–nor is any sin committed; akṛtena–by inaction; sarva-bhūteṣu cha–and of all beings; kaśchit na (bhavati)–no one is; asya artha-vyapāśrayaḥ–depended on by him for any purpose. [18]
18 In the world, he neither gains by action, nor loses by inaction. He does not depend on any other being (from Lord Brahmā down to the simplest life-form) for any purpose.
तस्मादसक्तः सततं कार्य्यं कर्म्म समाचर ।असक्तो ह्याचरन्कर्म्म परमाप्नोति पूरुषः ॥१९॥
tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ kāryaṁ karma samācharaasakto hy ācharan karma param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ [19]
tasmāt–Therefore; asaktaḥ (san)–being unattached to the fruits of your actions; satatam–always; samāchara–perfectly perform; kāryam karma–prescribed duties; hi–since; karma ācharan–by performing these duties; asaktaḥ–without attachment; pūruṣaḥ–a person; āpnoti–attains; param–liberation, param-bhakti—pure devotion. [19]
19 So perform your prescribed duties without attachment. By selflessly executing one’s duties a person attains liberation. (True liberation is the state of pure devotion, attained in the maturity of selfless action.)
कर्म्मणैव हि संसिद्धिमास्थिता जनकादयः ।लोकसङ्ग्रहमेवापि सम्पश्यन्कर्त्तुमर्हसि ॥२०॥
karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim āsthitā janakādayaḥloka-saṅgraham evāpi sampaśyan kartum arhasi [20]
janaka-ādayaḥ–The learned, such as King Janaka and others; hi–certainly; āsthitāḥ–obtained; saṁsiddhim–success—devotion; karmaṇā eva–by fulfilling their duties. arhasi–Be prepared; kartum–to do; (karma)–work; api–also; loka-saṅgraham sampaśyan eva–in the consideration of the welfare of the people. [20]
20 King Janaka and other learned personalities succeeded in attaining devotion through the execution of their prescribed duties. So it is fitting that you fulfill your duty in consideration of the welfare of the people.
यद्यदाचरति श्रेष्ठस्तत्तदेवेतरो जनः ।स यत्प्रमाणं कुरुते लोकस्तदनुवर्त्तते ॥२१॥
yad yad ācharati śreṣṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥsa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute lokas tad anuvartate [21]
yat yat–However; śreṣṭaḥ–the great personality; ācharati–conducts himself; itaraḥ janaḥ–other lesser men; (ācharati)–will conduct themselves; tat tat eva–accordingly. yat–Whatever; saḥ–the great personality; kurute–accepts; pramāṇam–as the standard; lokaḥ–ordinary men; tat anuvartate–follow that. [21]
21 The masses follow the ways of great men, following the standards they set.
न मे पार्थास्ति कर्त्तव्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु किञ्चन ।नानवाप्तमवाप्तव्यं वर्त्त एव च कर्म्मणि ॥२२॥
na me pārthāsti kartavyaṁ triṣu lokeṣu kiñchananānavāptam avāptavyaṁ varta eva cha karmaṇi [22]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; triṣu lokeṣu–in the three worlds; na asti–there is not; kiñchana–any; kartavyam–duty to be done; me–for Me; (yataḥ)–since; na (asti kiñchana)–there is nothing; anavāptam–unobtained; avāptavyam–or to be obtained; (mama)–for Me; (tathāpi)–and yet; varte eva cha–I am engaged; karmaṇi–in activity. [22]
22 O Arjuna, I have no duty in the three worlds. I lack nothing, and there is nothing to be attained by Me; and yet, I, Myself, am active.
यदि ह्यहं न वर्त्तेयं जातु कर्म्मण्यतन्द्रितः ।मम वर्त्त्मानुवर्त्तन्ते मनुष्याः पार्थ सर्व्वशः ॥२३॥
yadi hy ahaṁ na varteyaṁ jātu karmaṇy atandritaḥmama vartmānuvartante manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ [23]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; yadi jātu–if ever; aham–I; na varteyam–do not engage; atandritaḥ–attentively; karmaṇi–in duties; (tarhi)–then; hi–certainly; manuṣyāḥ–all men; anuvartante–will follow; mama–My; vartma–path; sarvaśaḥ–in all respects. [23]
23 O Arjuna, if ever I do not engage attentively in duties, then all men, following My example, will give up their duties.
उत्सीदेयुरिमे लोका न कुर्य्यां कर्म्म चेदहम् ।सङ्करस्य च कर्त्ता स्यामुपहन्यामिमाः प्रजाः ॥२४॥
utsīdeyur ime lokā na kuryāṁ karma ched ahamsaṅkarasya cha kartā syām upahanyām imāḥ prajāḥ [24]
chet–If; aham–I; na kuryān–do not engage in; karma–duty; (tarhi)–then; ime lokāḥ–the inhabitants of these worlds; utsīdeyuḥ–will be ruined; (karma tyaktvā)–by renouncing their duty; cha–and; (aham)–I; syām–will be; kartā–the maker; saṅkarasya–of varṇa-saṅkara, or adulterated progeny; (evam aham eva)–and in this way, I alone; upahanyām–will cause the downfall; imāḥ prajāḥ–of these people. [24]
24 If I do not engage in duty, the people of these worlds will renounce their duties and fall to ruination. Thus I will be responsible for their downfall, caused by adulterated progeny.
सक्ताः कर्म्मण्यविद्वांसो यथा कुर्व्वन्ति भारत ।कुर्य्याद्विद्वांस्तथासक्तश्चिकीर्षुर्लोकसङ्ग्रहम् ॥२५॥
saktāḥ karmaṇy avidvāṁso yathā kurvanti bhāratakuryād vidvāṁs tathāsaktaś chikīrṣur loka-saṅgraham [25]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; yathā–just as; avidvāṁsaḥ–the ignorant; karmaṇi saktāḥ–attached to work; kurvanti–perform; (karmaṇi)–work; tathā–similarly; vidvān–the wise; asaktaḥ (san)–being unattached; kuryāt–should work; chikīrṣuḥ–wishing; lokasaṅ graham–to guide the people. [25]
25 O Arjuna, as ignorant persons work with attachment, the wise, too, must work, but without attachment, in order to guide the general people who exist in the plane of worldly action. (They differ not in their work but in their attitudes of attachment and detachment.)
न बुद्धिभेदं जनयेदज्ञानां कर्म्मसङ्गिनाम् ।योजयेत्सर्व्वकर्म्माणि विद्वान्युक्तः समाचरन् ॥२६॥
na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed ajñānāṁ karma-saṅgināmyojayet sarva-karmāṇi vidvān yuktaḥ samācharan [26]
vidvān–The learned, the teacher of jñāna-yoga; na janayet–must not create; ajñānām–among ignorant men; karma-saṅginām–who are attached to work; buddhi-bhedam–the confusion to neglect duties and cultivate knowledge. (api tu)–Rather; yuktaḥ (san)–remaining unattached; samācharan–fully executing; sarva-karmāṇi–all duties; (ajñān) yojayet–they should encourage the ignorant in their duties. [26]
26 The scripturally learned teacher should not create confusion in the minds of ignorant, attached men by apparently advocating the neglect of duty for the cultivation of knowledge. Rather, he should set the example of selflessness in fulfilling duties, thus encouraging the ignorant in the performance of their prescribed duties.
प्रकृतेः क्रियमाणानि गुणैः कर्म्माणि सर्व्वशः ।अहङ्कारविमूढात्मा कर्त्ताहमिति मन्यते ॥२७॥
prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate [27]
karmāṇi–Actions; kriyamāṇāni–are effected; sarvaśaḥ–in all ways; guṇaiḥ–(by the senses, impelled) by the modes; prakṛteḥ–of material nature; (tu)–but; ahaṅkāra-vimūḍha-ātmā–one deluded by bodily ego; manyate iti–thinks thus; aham kartā–“I am the doer.” [27]
27 All actions in the world are in every respect effected by the modes of material nature (which impell the senses). But a man deluded by bodily identification thinks, “I alone am accomplishing this work.”
तत्त्ववित्तु महाबाहो गुणकर्म्मविभागयोः ।गुणा गुणेषु वर्त्तन्त इति मत्वा न सज्जते ॥२८॥
tattvavit tu mahā-bāho guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥguṇā guṇeṣu vartanta iti matvā na sajjate [28]
tu–But; (he) mahā-bāho–O Arjuna, best of heroes; tattva-vit–one who is in knowledge; guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ–of the division of the modes of material nature (the three modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance), and action (the functional demigods, the senses, and the sense objects); (saḥ)–he; matvā–considering; iti–that; guṇāḥ–the modes (in the form of the senses of perception—ear, skin, eyes, tongue, and nose, activated by the demigods); vartante–are engaged; guṇeṣu–within the modes (in the form of the sense objects of sound, touch, form, taste, and smell); na sajjate–is not attached to them, not absorbed in them. [28]
28 However, O mighty-armed Arjuna, one who is in knowledge of the division of the modes of material nature and action, knows that the modes are engaging within the modes, and he is detached from them. (One who knows that the three modes activated by the demigods impell the engagement of the senses with their objects, knows himself to be independent of these elements, therefore he does not consider himself a doer.)
प्रकृतेर्गुणसम्मूढाः सज्जन्ते गुणकर्म्मसु ।तानकृत्स्नविदो मन्दान्कृत्स्नविन्न विचालयेत् ॥२९॥
prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ sajjante guṇa-karmasutān akṛtsna-vido mandān kṛtsna-vin na vichālayet [29]
prakṛteḥ-guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ–Persons bewildered by the modes; sajjante–are absorbed; guṇa-karmasu–in the functions of the modes (the engagement of the senses with their objects). kṛtsna-vit–Those possessing knowledge; na vichālayet–should not agitate (by trying to induce them to accept knowledge of self and non-self); tān–those; akṛtsna-vidaḥ–ignorant; mandān–unfortunate persons; (kintu guṇāveśa-nivartakaṁ niṣkāma karmaiva kārayet)–but should rather engage them in selfless action which frees them from absorption in the modes of nature. [29]
29 Persons bewildered by the modes of nature are absorbed in the functions of the modes (the engagement of the senses with their objects). Enlightened persons should not agitate such ignorant, unfortunate persons by trying to convince them of higher philosophical truths. (Rather, they should advise the conditioned souls to practise selfless action, which liberates them from absorption in the modes.)
मयि सर्व्वाणि कर्म्माणि सन्न्यस्याध्यात्मचेतसा ।निराशीर्निर्म्ममो भूत्वा युध्यस्व विगतज्वरः ॥३०॥
mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi sannyasyādhyātma-chetasānirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ [30]
sannyasya–Completely surrendering; sarvāṇī karmāṇi–all activities; mayi–unto Me; adhyātma-chetasā–always conscious of the Spiritual Being; bhūtvā–being; nirāśīḥ–without fruitive desire; nirmamaḥ–without possessiveness; vigata-jvaraḥ (cha)–and without anguish; yudhyasva–fight. [30]
30 Surrender all your activities to Me with this understanding: “All my actions are under the control of the indwelling Lord.” In such consciousness, free from possessiveness and anguish, take recourse to battle (as your natural duty).
ये मे मतमिदं नित्यमनुतिष्ठन्ति मानवाः ।श्रद्धावन्तोऽनसूयन्तो मुच्यन्ते तेऽपि कर्म्मभिः ॥३१॥
ye me matam idaṁ nityam anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥśraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto muchyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ [31]
ye mānavāḥ–Those men who; śraddhāvantaḥ–faithfully; anasūyantaḥ–and unbegrudgingly; nityam–always; anutiṣṭhanti–execute; idam–this; me matam–teaching of Mine, of selfless action; te api–they too; muchyante–are liberated; karmabhiḥ–from the bondage of karma, or action and reaction in the mundane plane. [31]
31 Faithful, unbegrudging men who always practise My teaching, this yoga of selfless action, are liberated from the bondage of action, even though they engage in action.
ये त्वेतदभ्यसूयन्तो नानुतिष्ठन्ति मे मतम् ।सर्व्वज्ञानविमूढांस्तान्विद्धि नष्टानचेतसः ॥३२॥
ye tv etad abhyasūyanto nānutiṣṭhanti me matamsarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān viddhi naṣṭān achetasaḥ [32]
ye tu–But those who; abhyasūyantaḥ–out of resentment; na anutiṣṭhanti–do not follow; etat me matam–that teaching of Mine; tān viddhi–know them to be; sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhān–deprived of all knowledge; naṣṭān–completely deviated from the goal of human life; achetasaḥ–and bereft of good intelligence. [32]
32 But the arrogant who resent My teaching are bereft of all knowledge. Know them to be lost in ignorance.
सदृशं चेष्टते स्वस्याः प्रकृतेर्ज्ञानवानपि ।प्रकृतिं यान्ति भूतानि निग्रहः किं करिष्यति ॥३३॥
sadṛśaṁ cheṣṭate svasyāḥ prakṛter jñānavān apiprakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati [33]
jñānavān api–Even a knowledgable person; cheṣṭate–acts; sadṛśam–according to; svasyāḥ prakṛteḥ–his nature. bhūtāni–Living beings; prakṛtim yānti–follow their natures. kim kariṣyati–What will be the use of; nigrahaḥ–repression; (teṣām)–of them? [33]
33 For even a knowledgable person tends to act according to his nature (mundane inclinations). The living beings’ endeavours are dictated by their natures. What, then, can repression accomplish?
इन्द्रियस्येन्द्रियस्यार्थे रागद्वेषौ व्यवस्थितौ ।तयोर्न वशमागच्छेत्तौ ह्यस्य परिपन्थिनौ ॥३४॥
indriyasyendriyasyārthe rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitautayor na vaśam āgachchhet tau hy asya paripanthinau [34]
rāga-dveṣau–Attraction and aversion; indriyasya–of all the senses; vyavasthitau–exist; indriyasya-arthe–for their objects. (tathāpi)–However; vaśam na āgachchhet–One must not be controlled; tayoḥ–by such attraction and aversion; hi–since; tau pari-panthinau–they are an obstacle; asya–to the spiritual practitioner. [34]
34 Although the senses are attracted to and repelled by the sense objects, one must not be controlled by these urges, for they are the greatest enemy of the candidate for self-realisation.
श्रेयान्स्वधर्म्मो विगुणः परधर्म्मात्स्वनुष्ठितात् ।स्वधर्म्मे निधनं श्रेयः परधर्म्मो भयावहः ॥३५॥
śreyān svadharmo viguṇaḥ para-dharmāt svanuṣṭhitātsvadharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ [35]
svadharmaḥ–One’s own function; viguṇaḥ–tinged with faults; śreyān–is better; para-dharmāt–than another’s function; su-anuṣṭhitāt–done well. nidhanam–Even death; svadharme–on one’s own path of duty (according to one’s appropiate position in the varṇāśram or God-centred socio-religious system); śreyaḥ–is better. para-dharmaḥ–Another’s path of duty; bhaya-āvahaḥ–is dangerous. [35]
35 Even if it is imperfect, it is better to do one’s duty according to one’s own nature, than to do another’s well. Even death in the discharge of one’s own duty is better, for to perform another’s is dangerous.
Commentary
The eternal, superexcellent, natural function (dharma) of the soul is pure devotion to Adhokṣaja, the transcendental Lord. Therefore, even if this function is somewhat imperfectly attempted by one with external malpractices, such an attempt will be superior to the ‘good’ practices within the material modes of nature and worldly chain of actions and habits foreign to the soul’s nature. Even if death occurs during the cultivation of such pure devotion in proper saintly association, it is the bestower of the ultimate good; but in the name of good practices to ignorantly follow ‘another’s path’—anything other than devotion to the Lord (dvitīyābhiniveś)—is bhayāvaḥ, endangering to the spiritual progress of the soul.*
* भयं द्वितीयाभिनिवेशतः स्याद्ईशादपेतस्य विपर्य्ययोऽस्मृतिः ।तन्माययातो बुध आभजेत्तंभक्त्यैकयेशं गुरुदेवतात्मा ॥
bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syādīśād apetasya viparyayo ’smṛtiḥtan māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁbhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā
(SB: 11.2.37)
“A person of fine intelligence will serve with single-minded devotion his Lord who is his teacher and dearmost friend. But those who have turned away from the Lord adopt the illusory ego of considering the perishable body to be the self, forgetting their true identities. Their consciousness absorbed in ‘secondary pursuits’, i.e., mundane objectives, they are always fearful on account of the body and its attachments.”
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
अथ केन प्रयुक्तोऽयं पापञ्चरति पूरुषः ।अनिच्छन्नपि वार्ष्णेय बलादिव नियोजितः ॥३६॥
arjuna uvācha
atha kena prayukto ’yaṁ pāpañ charati pūruṣaḥanichchhann api vārṣṇeya balād iva niyojitaḥ [36]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: atha–Now; (he) vārṣṇeya–O descendant of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty; kena prayuktaḥ (san)–being incited by what; ayam pūruṣaḥ charati–does this living being commit; pāpam–sinful activities; anichchhan api–even unwillingly; niyojitaḥ iva–as if engaged; balāt–by force? [36]
36 Arjuna inquired: O descendant of the Vṛṣṇis, by what is the living being compelled to commit sinful activities, even unwillingly, as if by force?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
काम एष क्रोध एष रजोगुणसमुद्भवः ।महाशनो महापाप्मा विद्ध्येनमिह वैरिणम् ॥३७॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajoguṇa-samudbhavaḥmahāśano mahā-pāpmā viddhy enam iha vairiṇam [37]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: eṣaḥ kāmaḥ–It is this desire to enjoy the mundane; eṣaḥ krodhaḥ–transformed into anger. rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ–It arises from the mode of passion, and from that desire, blind anger is born. viddhi enam–Know such desire to be; mahā-aśanaḥ–never satisfied; mahā-pāpmā–greatly wrathful; vairiṇam–and the worst enemy of the living being; iha–in this world. [37]
37 The Supreme Lord replied: It is the desire to enjoy the mundane that induces a person to commit sin, and in different situations it produces anger. It is utterly insatiable, extremely malicious, and the worst enemy of the living being in this world.
धूमेनाव्रियते वह्निर्यथादर्शो मलेन च ।यथोल्बेनावृतो गर्भस्तथा तेनेदमावृतम् ॥३८॥
dhūmenāvriyate vahnir yathādarśo malena chayatholbenāvṛto garbhas tathā tenedam āvṛtam [38]
yathā–As; vahniḥ–fire; āvriyate–is covered; dhūmena–by smoke; yathā–as; ādarśaḥ–a mirror; (āvriyate)–is covered; malena–by dust; (yathā) cha–and as; garbhaḥ–the embryo; āvṛtaḥ–is covered; ulbena–by the womb; tathā–similarly; idam–one’s consciousness; āvṛtam–is covered; tena–by that desire. [38]
38 As fire is thinly veiled by smoke, as a mirror is thickly covered with dust, and as the embryo remains completely enclosed within the womb, similarly, this desire covers the consciousness of the living being (in these three degrees of intensity, according to the modes of material nature—goodness, passion, and ignorance respectively).
आवृतं ज्ञानमेतेन ज्ञानिनो नित्यवैरिणा ।कामरूपेण कौन्तेय दुष्पूरेणानलेन च ॥३९॥
āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena jñānino nitya-vairiṇākāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya duṣpūreṇānalena cha [39]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna, son of Kuntī; jñānam–discriminatory knowledge; āvṛtam–is covered; etena–by this; nitya-vairiṇā–perpetual enemy; jñāninaḥ–of even knowledgable persons; kāma-rūpeṇa–in the form of desire; duṣpūreṇa analena cha–which is like insatiable fire. [39]
39 Knowledge is covered by desire, the constant enemy of the wise. It burns like an insatiable fire (never satisfied by offerings of butter).
इन्द्रियाणि मनो बुद्धिरस्याधिष्ठानमुच्यते ।एतैर्विमोहयत्येष ज्ञानमावृत्य देहिनम् ॥४०॥
indriyāṇi mano buddhir asyādhiṣṭhānam uchyateetair vimohayaty eṣa jñānam āvṛtya dehinam [40]
uchyate–It is said that; indriyāṇi–the senses; manaḥ buddhiḥ–mind and intelligence; adhiṣṭhānam–are the seats; asya–of this enemy, desire. āvṛtya–Covering; jñānam–one’s knowledge; etaiḥ–via these seats; eṣaḥ–this desire; vimohayati–deludes; dehinam–the embodied living being. [40]
40 It is said that this enemy, desire, dwelling within the senses, mind, and intelligence, covers the perception of the embodied living being and deludes him.
तस्मात्त्वमिन्द्रियाण्यादौ नियम्य भरतर्षभ ।पाप्मानं प्रजहि ह्येनं ज्ञानविज्ञाननाशनम् ॥४१॥
tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau niyamya bharatarṣabhapāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam [41]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O Arjuna, noblest of the Bhāratas; tvam–you; tasmāt–therefore; ādau–first; indriyāṇi niyamya–bring the senses under control; hi–and completely; prajahi–destroy; enam–this desire; pāpmānam–which is the embodiment of sin; jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam–and the destroyer of both jñān, knowledge of the self and non-self as delineated in the scriptures, and vijñān, realisation of such knowledge. [41]
41 Therefore, O noblest of the Bhāratas, control your senses and destroy this desire, the embodiment of sin, which destroys both knowledge and realisation.
इन्द्रियाणि पराण्याहुरिन्द्रियेभ्यः परं मनः ।मनसस्तु परा बुद्धिर्बुद्धेर्यः परतस्तु सः ॥४२॥
indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥmanasas tu parā buddhir buddher yaḥ paratas tu saḥ [42]
(paṇḍitāḥ)–The wise; āhuḥ–say that; indriyāṇi parāṇi–the senses are superior; (viṣayebhyaḥ)–to matter; manaḥ–the mind; param–is superior; indriyebhyaḥ–to the senses; buddhiḥ–the intelligence or faculty of decision; parā–is superior; manasaḥ tu–to the mind, too; yaḥ–and that which; parataḥ–is superior; buddheḥ tu–to even the intelligence; saḥ–is he—the jīva—the soul. [42]
42 It is said by the wise that the senses are superior to matter, the mind is superior to the senses, and the intelligence is superior to the mind; and the soul is superior to even the intelligence.
एवं बुद्धेः परं बुद्ध्वा संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना ।जहि शत्रुं महाबाहो कामरूपं दुरासदम् ॥४३॥
evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanājahi śatruṁ mahā-bāho kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam [43]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty Arjuna; evam–in this way; buddhvā–discerning; buddheḥ param–the soul to be superior to the intelligence; saṁstabhya–by steadying; ātmānam–the mind; ātmanā–by resolute intelligence—conviction; jahi–destroy; durāsadam–the formidable; śatrum–enemy; kāma-rūpam–in the form of desire. [43]
43 O mighty Arjuna, knowing the soul to be superior to the intelligence, steady the mind with resolute intelligence and destroy the formidable enemy, desire.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रेश्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे कर्म्मयोगो नाम तृतीयोऽध्यायः ॥३॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvādekarma-yogo nāma tṛtīyo ’dhyāyaḥ [3]
End of Chapter ThreeThe Path of Actionfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Chapter Four Jñāna-yoga The Path of Knowledge
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
इमं विवस्वते योगं प्रोक्तवानहमव्ययम् ।विवस्वान्मनवे प्राह मनुरिक्ष्वाकवेऽब्रवीत् ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayamvivasvān manave prāha manur ikṣvākave ’bravīt [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Lord said: aham–I; proktavān–imparted; imam–this; avyayam–imperishable; yogam–yoga of knowledge (jñāna-yoga) achieved by selfless action; vivasvate–to Sūrya, the sun-god. vivasvān–Sūrya; prāha–taught; manave–his son, Vaivasvata Manu; manuḥ–and Manu; abravīt–related it; ikṣvākave–to his son,  Ikṣvāku. [1]
1 The Supreme Lord said: I imparted this imperishable yoga of knowledge, achieved by selfless action, to Sūrya, the presiding deity of the sun. Sūrya taught it to his son Vaivasvata Manu, who passed it on to his son Ikṣvāku.
एवं परम्पराप्राप्तमिमं राजर्षयो विदुः ।स कालेनेह महता योगो नष्टः परन्तप ॥२॥
evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥsa kāleneha mahatā yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa [2]
evam–In this way; paramparā-prāptam–attained through disciplic succession; rājarṣayaḥ–the saintly kings; viduḥ–came to know; imam–this path. (he) parantapa–O Arjuna, subduer of the enemy; saḥ yogaḥ–that yoga; naṣṭaḥ–has been lost; iha–at present; mahatā kālena–after the passage of a long time. [2]
2 O conqueror of the enemy, thus the saintly kings such as Nimi, Janaka, and others learned this yoga, which was passed down to them by disciplic succession. But in the course of time, this teaching has been lost.
स एवायं मया तेऽद्य योगः प्रोक्तः पुरातनः ।भक्तोऽसि मे सखा चेति रहस्यं ह्येतदुत्तमम् ॥३॥
sa evāyaṁ mayā te ’dya yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥbhakto ’si me sakhā cheti rahasyaṁ hy etad uttamam [3]
(tvam)–You; asi–are; me–My; bhaktaḥ sakhā cha–devotee and friend. iti (hetoḥ)–For this reason; ayam saḥ eva–this very same; purātanaḥ–ancient; yogaḥ–yoga; proktaḥ–is described; adya–today; mayā–by Me; te–to you; hi–although; etat–this; uttamam rahasyam–is a great secret. [3]
3 As you are my devotee and friend, I now reveal to you this supreme secret—the eternal yoga.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
अपरं भवतो जन्म परं जन्म विवस्वतः ।कथमेतद्विजानीयां त्वमादौ प्रोक्तवानिति ॥४॥
arjuna uvācha
aparaṁ bhavato janma paraṁ janma vivasvataḥkatham etad vijānīyāṁ tvam ādau proktavān iti [4]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: bhavataḥ–Your; janma–birth; aparam–is in these times. vivasvataḥ–The sun-god’s; janma–birth; param–was long ago. (tasmāt)–So; katham–how; (aham) vijānīyām–am I to understand; etat–that; ādau–in ancient times; tvam–You; proktavān iti–had thus taught; (imam yogam)–this yoga? [4]
4 Arjuna said: Vivasvān, the sun-god, was born in ancient times, long before You were. Therefore, how am I to consider that You previously gave these teachings to him?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
बहूनि मे व्यतीतानि जन्मानि तव चर्ज्जुन ।तान्यहं वेद सर्व्वाणि न त्वं वेत्थ परन्तप ॥५॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
bahūni me vyatītāni janmāni tava chārjunatāny ahaṁ veda sarvāṇi na tvaṁ vettha parantapa [5]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) parantapa arjuna–O Arjuna, subduer of the enemy; bahūni–many; janmāni–births; me tava cha–of Mine and yours; vyatītāni–have passed. aham–I; veda–know; tāni sarvāṇi–all of them; tvam–(but) you; na vettha–do not know; (tāni)–them. [5]
5 The Supreme Lord said: O chastiser of the enemy, both you and I have passed through many births. I can remember all of them, whereas you, O Arjuna, cannot.
अजोऽपि सन्नव्ययात्मा भूतानामीश्वरोऽपि सन् ।प्रकृतिं स्वामधिष्ठाय सम्भवाम्यात्ममायया ॥६॥
ajo ’pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro ’pi sanprakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā [6]
api–Although; san–being; ajaḥ–birthless; avyaya-ātmā–of imperishable form; api–and although; san–being; īśvaraḥ–the Supreme Lord; bhūtānām–of all beings; (aham)–I; adhiṣṭhāya–remaining; svām prakṛtim–in My own divine nature of truth, auspiciousness, and beauty; sambhavāmi–appear in the world; ātma-māyayā–by My potency, yogamāyā. [6]
6 Although My eternal form is transcendental to birth and death, and I am the Lord of all beings, I appear within the world in My divine nature, by My sweet will, extending My internal potency.
यदा यदा हि धर्म्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत ।अभ्युत्थानमधर्म्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् ॥७॥
yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārataabhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [7]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; yadā yadā hi–whenever; glāniḥ–a decline; dharmasya–of religion; (cha)–and; abhyutthānam–an uprising; adharmasya–of irreligion; bhavati–occurs; tadā–then; aham sṛjāmi–I appear, seemingly like a being born in this world—I make My advent; ātmānam–Myself. [7]
7 O Bhārata, whenever there is a decline of religion and an uprising of irreligion, I personally make My advent.
परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम् ।धर्म्मसंस्थापनार्थाय सम्भवामि युगे युगे ॥८॥
paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya cha duṣkṛtāmdharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya sambhavāmi yuge yuge [8]
paritrāṇāya–For the deliverance; sādhūnām–of saintly devotees; (tathā)–and; vināśāya–for the vanquishing; duṣkṛtām–of miscreants; saṁsthāpana-arthāya cha–and for firmly establishing; dharma–dhyān (meditation), yajana (performance of sacrifice), paricharyā (worship), and saṅkīrtan (congregational chanting of the Holy Names) all centred on Me; (aham)–I; sambhavāmi–appear; yuge yuge–age after age. [8]
8 I appear age after age to deliver the saintly devotees, vanquish the miscreants, and firmly establish true religion.
जन्म कर्म्म च मे दिव्यमेवं यो वेत्ति तत्त्वतः ।त्यक्त्वा देहं पुनर्जन्म नैति मामेति सोऽर्ज्जुन ॥९॥
janma karma cha me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥtyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so ’rjuna [9]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; yaḥ–one who; vetti–knows; evam–thus; tattvataḥ–the reality; me–of My; divyam–spontaneous, divine; janma karma cha–birth and activities; saḥ–he; tyaktvā–upon giving up; deham–the body; na eti–does not accept; punaḥ janma–rebirth. mam eti–He attains Me. [9]
9 O Arjuna, one who comes to know thus the truth of My Pastimes of divine birth and activities, does not undergo rebirth. After giving up this body, he attains Me. (My grace is revealed to him as My personal transcendental joyful potency, hlādinī-śakti. His heart is melted in divine love, and he attains My eternal devotional service.)
वीतरागभयक्रोधा मन्मया मामुपाश्रिताः ।बहवो ज्ञानतपसा पूता मद्भावमागताः ॥१०॥
vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā man-mayā mām upāśritāḥbahavo jñāna-tapasā pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ [10]
vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhāḥ–Free from mundane attachment, fear, and anger; mat-mayāḥ–wholeheartedly absorbed in services to Me; bahavaḥ–many persons; mām upāśritāḥ–in My refuge; pūtāḥ (santaḥ)–being purified; jñāna-tapasā–by knowledge and austerities in relation to My service; āgatāḥ–attained; mat-bhāvam–My bhāva—devotion to Me. [10]
10 Free from attachment, fear, and anger, many persons have taken shelter in Me, absorbing their hearts in My services (hearing, chanting, and remembering). Purified by knowledge and the fire of ordeal in My service, they attained divine love for Me.
ये यथा मां प्रपद्यन्ते तांस्तथैव भजाम्यहम् ।मम वर्त्त्मानुवर्त्तन्ते मनुष्याः पार्थ सर्व्वशः ॥११॥
ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy ahammama vartmānuvartante manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ [11]
yathā–Howsoever; ye–those who; prapadyante–surrender; mām–to Me; aham–I; tathā eva–accordingly; bhajāmi–reward; tān–them. (he) pārtha–O Arjuna; sarvaśaḥ manuṣyāḥ–all types of men (on all paths); anuvartante–follow; mama vartma–My path. [11]
11 Howsoever people surrender to Me, I accordingly reward them. Being the ultimate goal of all paths, I am the objective to be attained by all. O Pārtha, all men follow My various paths.
काङ्क्षन्तः कर्म्मणां सिद्धिं यजन्त इह देवताः ।क्षिप्रं हि मानुषे लोके सिद्धिर्भवति कर्म्मजा ॥१२॥
kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ yajanta iha devatāḥkṣipraṁ hi mānuṣe loke siddhir bhavati karmajā [12]
iha–In this world; kāṅkṣantaḥ–persons who desire; siddhim–the fruition; karmaṇām–of worldly actions; yajante–worship; devatāḥ–the demigods; hi–since; mānuṣe loke–in the human plane; siddhiḥ–the fruit (attainment of heaven, etc.); karma-jā–born of action; bhavati–appears; kṣipram–very quickly. [12]
12 Persons who desire the fruit of their actions worship the gods, since in the human plane, actions swiftly bear fruit.
चातुर्वर्ण्यं मया सृष्टं गुणकर्म्मविभागशः ।तस्य कर्त्तारमपि मां विद्ध्यकर्त्तारमव्ययम् ॥१३॥
chātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥtasya kartāram api māṁ viddhy akartāram avyayam [13]
chātuḥ-varṇyam–The four social divisions or varṇas—brāhmaṇ, kṣatriya, vaiśya, and śūdra; sṛṣṭam–are manifest; mayā–by Me; guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ–classified according to the modes of nature and corresponding activities (vide 18.41–44). kartāram api–Although I am the accomplisher; tasya–of that; viddhi–know; mām–Me; akartāram–to be the non-doer; avyayam–and unchangeable. [13]
13 The four social divisions, classified according to the material modes of nature and corresponding activities, are made manifest by Me. Although I am the doer of this, know Me to be the non-doer and unchangable.
न मां कर्म्माणि लिम्पन्ति न मे कर्म्मफले स्पृहा ।इति मां योऽभिजानाति कर्म्मभिर्न स बध्यते ॥१४॥
na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti na me karma-phale spṛhāiti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti karmabhir na sa badhyate [14]
karmāṇi–Actions; na limpanti–do not implicate or taint; mām–Me; (jīvam iva)–like the living beings. na (asti)–There is no; spṛhā–desire; me–of Mine; karma-phale–for the fruits of action. yaḥ–One who; iti–thus; mām abhijānāti–knows Me in truth (as the Supreme Lord); saḥ–he; na badhyate–is not bound; karmabhiḥ–by karma. [14]
14 I am never implicated by action nor do I desire the fruits of action. One who knows Me thus (as the Supreme Lord, transcendental to worldly action) is never bound by action.
एवं ज्ञात्वा कृतं कर्म्म पूर्व्वैरपि मुमुक्षुभिः ।कुरु कर्म्मैव तस्मात्त्वं पूर्व्वैः पूर्व्वतरं कृतम् ॥१५॥
evaṁ jñātvā kṛtaṁ karma pūrvair api mumukṣubhiḥkuru karmaiva tasmāt tvaṁ pūrvaiḥ pūrvataraṁ kṛtam [15]
jñātvā–Knowing; evam–this; mumukṣubhiḥ api–the seekers of liberation; pūrvaiḥ–of previous times; kṛtam–performed; karma–selfless action. tasmāt–Therefore; tvam–you; eva–certainly; kuru–must adopt; karma–the path of selfless action; pūrvataram kṛtam–as done in the past; pūrvaiḥ–by the ancient mahājans, great saintly persons, like Janaka and others. [15]
15 Knowing this basic principle, seekers of liberation in previous times renounced all fruitive work and performed their duties as a selfless offering to Me. Likewise, you should adopt this yoga of selfless action as did the great saintly persons of yore.
किं कर्म्म किमकर्म्मेति कवयोऽप्यत्र मोहिताः ।तत्ते कर्म्म प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात् ॥१६॥
kiṁ karma kim akarmeti kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥtat te karma pravakṣyāmi yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt [16]
kim karma–What is action? kim akarma–what is inaction? iti atra–In this subject; kavayaḥ api–even the learned; mohitāḥ (bhavanti)–are baffled. (ataḥ)–Therefore; pravakṣyāmi–I shall describe; te–to you; tat karma–what is karma and akarma, action and inaction; yat jñātvā–knowing which; mokṣyase–you will be liberated; aśubhāt–from inauspiciousness. [16]
16 What is action? What is inaction? Even the learned have difficulty understanding this. Hence, I shall enlighten you in this matter, knowing which you will liberated from inauspiciousness.
कर्म्मणो ह्यपि बोद्धव्यं बोद्धव्यञ्च विकर्म्मणः ।अकर्म्मणश्च बोद्धव्यं गहना कर्म्मणो गतिः ॥१७॥
karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ boddhavyañ cha vikarmaṇaḥakarmaṇaś cha boddhavyaṁ gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ [17]
karmaṇaḥ api boddhavyam–Action prescribed (by the Vedas) should be understood; cha–and; vikarmaṇaḥ boddhavyam–action prohibited (by the Vedas) should be understood; cha–and; akarmaṇaḥ boddhavyam–renunciation of action should be understood; hi–since; gatiḥ–the true nature; karmaṇaḥ–of action; gahanā–is very difficult to comprehend. [17]
17 The true nature of action is difficult to comprehend. One should understand prescribed action, prohibited action, and inaction.
कर्म्मण्यकर्म्म यः पश्येदकर्म्मणि च कर्म्म यः ।स बुद्धिमान्मनुष्येषु स युक्तः कृत्स्नकर्म्मकृत् ॥१८॥
karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed akarmaṇi cha karma yaḥsa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu sa yuktaḥ kṛtsna-karma-kṛt [18]
yaḥ–One who; paśyet–sees; akarma–inaction; karmaṇi–in action; cha–and; yaḥ–who; (paśyet)–sees; karma–action; akarmaṇi–in inaction; saḥ buddhimān–he is wise; manuṣyeṣu–among men. saḥ yuktaḥ–He is a yogī; kṛtsna-karma-kṛt–a performer of all actions. [18]
18 One who sees action within inaction, and inaction within action, is wise among men. He is a yogī and a performer of all actions.
यस्य सर्व्वे समारम्भाः कामसङ्कल्पवर्ज्जिताः ।ज्ञानाग्निदग्धकर्म्माणं तमाहुः पण्डितं बुधाः ॥१९॥
yasya sarve samārambhāḥ kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥjñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ tam āhuḥ paṇḍitaṁ budhāḥ [19]
yasya–One whose; sarve–every; samārambhāḥ–undertaking; kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ–is without fruitive desire; jñāna-agni-dagdha-karmāṇam–and who has burnt all actions in the fire of knowledge; budhāḥ–the wise; āhuḥ tam–describe him as; paṇḍitam–learned. [19]
19 One whose every action is without fruitive desire, and who burns all actions in the fire of knowledge, is described by the wise as learned.
त्यक्त्वा कर्म्मफलासङ्गं नित्यतृप्तो निराश्रयः ।कर्म्मण्यभिप्रवृत्तोऽपि नैव किञ्चित्करोति सः ॥२०॥
tyaktvā karma-phalāsaṅgaṁ nitya-tṛpto nirāśrayaḥkarmaṇy abhipravṛtto ’pi naiva kiñchit karoti saḥ [20]
(yaḥ)–One who; tyaktvā–giving up; karma-phala-āsaṅgam–attachment to the fruits of action; nirāśrayaḥ–is free from mundane dependence; nitya-tṛptaḥ–and content in the eternal bliss within; saḥ–he; abhipravṛttaḥ api–although fully engaged; karmaṇi–in all kinds of activities; na karoti–does not do; kiñchit eva–anything at all. [20]
20 Such a person, giving up attachment to the fruits of action, fully content in the eternal bliss within, and free from mundane dependence, though fully active, does nothing at all.
निराशीर्यतचित्तात्मा त्यक्तसर्व्वपरिग्रहः ।शारीरं केवलं कर्म्म कुर्व्वन्नाप्नोति किल्बिषम् ॥२१॥
nirāśīr yata-chittātmā tyakta-sarva-parigrahaḥśārīraṁ kevalaṁ karma kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam [21]
nirāśīḥ–Desireless; yata-chitta-ātmā–of controlled mind and body; tyakta-sarva-pari-grahaḥ–and a renouncer of all possessiveness and acquisition; (saḥ)–that person; na āpnoti–does not incur; kilbiṣam–sin; kurvan (api)–although he performs; śārīram karma–action for bodily sustenance; kevalam–only. [21]
21 Desireless, controlling mind and body by the intelligence, and renouncing all possessiveness and acquisition, no sinful or pious reaction is incurred by such a person who may act to acquire mundane objects merely for his bodily sustenance.
यदृच्छालाभसन्तुष्टो द्वन्द्वातीतो विमत्सरः ।समः सिद्धावसिद्धौ च कृत्वापि न निबध्यते ॥२२॥
yadṛchchhā-lābha-santuṣṭo dvandvātīto vimatsaraḥsamaḥ siddhāv asiddhau cha kṛtvāpi na nibadhyate [22]
(janaḥ)–A person; yadṛchchhā-lābha-santuṣṭaḥ–satisfied with whatever is readily available; dvandva-atītaḥ–beyond dualities such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, attraction and aversion; vimatsaraḥ–devoid of envy; cha–and; samaḥ–equipoised; siddhau-asiddhau–in the event of either success or failure of action; kṛtvā api–though performing; (karma)–action; na nibadhyate–is not bound. [22]
22 Content with whatever is readily available and unaffected by dualities (of pleasure and pain, attraction and aversion), such a person has no envy. He is equipoised, neither elated nor dejected in success or failure. Though active, he is not bound by any action.
गतसङ्गस्य मुक्तस्य ज्ञानावस्थितचेतसः।यज्ञायाचरतः कर्म्म समग्रं प्रविलीयते ॥२३॥
gata-saṅgasya muktasya jñānāvasthita-chetasaḥyajñāyācharataḥ karma samagraṁ pravilīyate [23]
gata-saṅgasya–For one who is free from attachment; muktasya–who is liberated; jñāna-avasthita-chetasaḥ–who is realised; karma ācharataḥ–who performs action; yajñāya–for yajña, i.e. for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord; samagram–all; (karma)– action; pravilīyate–is dissipated, i.e. it does not produce any reaction.
23 For one who is detached, enlightened, and liberated, all his actions, performed in the spirit of sacrifice, are perfectly dissipated.
Commentary
The actions of one practising the yoga of selfless action do not lead to apūrva as considered by the philosophers known as karma-mīmāṁsaka. According to their ethical yet atheistic ideology, the karma-mīmāṁsakas or mundane rationalists claim that pious actions produce an unseen, subtle potency known as apūrva, which must fructify at the appropriate time after death. Their conception that this fruit can later be shared by others is meant to show the eternality of karma, or action, but it ignores the presence of the Supreme Autocrat.
So the statement of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “Samagraṁ pravilīyate: all actions are dissipated,” ought not be misinterpreted to mean that the actions of liberated souls cause some such remote worldly consequence, or apūrva. Rather, the Lord indicates that the actions offered to Him by the selfless karma-yogī do not cause any subsequent reaction to be either enjoyed or suffered by others in this mundane plane.
ब्रह्मार्पणं ब्रह्म हविर्ब्रह्माग्नौ ब्रह्मणा हुतम् ।ब्रह्मैव तेन गन्तव्यं ब्रह्मकर्म्मसमधिना ॥२४॥
brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutambrahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ brahma-karma-samadhinā [24]
arpaṇam (bhavati)–The sacrificial utensils such as sruk, sruvā, or spoon, ladle, etc., are; brahma–Brahma; (arpyamāṇam) haviḥ–the oblation of ghee, etc.; (bhavati)–is; brahma–Brahma; hutam–offered; brahma-agnau–into the sacrificial fire of Brahma; brahmaṇā (havana kartā)–by the brāhmaṇ offerer who is Brahma. brahma eva–Brahma, the Absolute; gantavyam–is attainable; tena brahma-karma-samādhinā–by a person whose consciousness is absorbed in Brahma action. [24]
24 The ladle is Brahma, the oblation is Brahma offered by Brahma into the fire of Brahma. One whose consciousness is fully absorbed in Brahma action certainly attains to Brahma, the Absolute.
दैवमेवापरे यज्ञं योगिनः पर्य्युपासते ।ब्रह्माग्नावपरे यज्ञं यज्ञेनैवोपजुह्वति ॥२५॥
daivam evāpare yajñaṁ yoginaḥ paryupāsatebrahmāgnāv apare yajñaṁ yajñenaivopajuhvati [25]
apare–Other; yoginaḥ–(karma-) yogīs; paryupāsate–worship; daivam yajñam eva–the demigods with sacrifice. apare–Other (jñāna-) yogīs; upajuhvati–offer; yajñam–the self (jīvātmā, as the element tvam, representing the ghee of sacrifice); brahma-agnau–to the fire of Brahma (or to the Supersoul, Paramātmā, as the element tat, representing the sacrificial fire); yajñena eva–by vibrating the praṇava mantra, Om. [25]
25 Some yogīs offer sacrifices to the demigods, and others offer the self into the fire of Brahma by vibrating the praṇava mantra, Om.
श्रोत्रादीनीन्द्रियाण्यन्ये संयमाग्निषु जुह्वति ।शब्दादीन्विषयानन्य इन्द्रियाग्निषु जुह्वति ॥२६॥
śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy anye saṁyamāgniṣu juhvatiśabdādīn viṣayān anya indriyāgniṣu juhvati [26]
anye–Others (naiṣṭika or lifelong celibates); juhvati–offer; indriyāṇi–the senses; śrotra-ādīni–of hearing, etc.; saṁyama-agniṣu–into the fires of self (mental) control. anye–Others (persons in sacred marriage); juhvati–offer; viṣayān–the sense objects; śabda-ādīn–sound, etc.; indriya-agniṣu–into the fires of the senses. [26]
26 Some offer their senses of hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, and smelling into the fires of self-control; yet others offer the sense objects of sound, touch, form, taste, and smell into the fire of the senses.
सर्व्वाणीन्द्रियकर्म्माणि प्राणकर्म्माणि चापरे ।आत्मसंयमयोगाग्नौ जुह्वति ज्ञानदीपिते ॥२७॥
sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi prāṇa-karmāṇi chāpareātma-saṁyama-yogāgnau juhvati jñāna-dīpite [27]
apare–Others (meditating mystic yogīs in realisation of the pure self [tvam]); juhvati–offer; sarvāṇi–all; indriya-karmāṇi–the functions of the senses; cha–and; prāṇa-karmāṇi–the functions of the ten vital life-airs; ātma-saṁyama-yoga-agnau–into the yogic fire of self-purification; jñāna-dīpite–ignited by knowledge. [27]
27 Again, there are the yogīs who offer all the functions of the senses and the life forces into the yogic fire of self-purification ignited by knowledge.
द्रव्ययज्ञास्तपोयज्ञा योगयज्ञास्तथापरे ।स्वाध्यायज्ञानयज्ञाश्च यतयः संशितव्रताः ॥२८॥
dravya-yajñās tapo-yajñā yoga-yajñās tathāparesvādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś cha yatayaḥ saṁśita-vratāḥ [28]
(kechit)–Some; dravya-yajñāḥ–sacrifice material possessions or wealth; (kechit)–some; tapaḥ-yajñāḥ–perform sacrifice in the form of penance (such as Chāndrāyaṇ, etc.); tathā-apare–and others; yoga-yajñāḥ–perform sacrifice in the form of the eightfold mystic yoga practice; (kechana)–and again some; svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāḥ cha–perform ‘knowledge-sacrifice’ in the form of singing and introspectively studying the Vedas. (ete sarve)–All these persons; yatayaḥ–are diligent; saṁśita-vratāḥ–performers of unshakeable vows. [28]
28 Sincere in their practices and faithful to their vows, some persons sacrifice their possessions, some undergo strict penances as a sacrifice, some practise the eightfold mystic yoga as a sacrifice, and yet others perform ‘knowledge-sacrifice’ by singing and introspectively studying the Vedas.
अपाने जुह्वति प्राणं प्राणेऽपानं तथापरे ।प्राणापानगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणायामपरायणाः ।अपरे नियताहाराः प्राणान्प्राणेषु जुह्वति ॥२९॥
apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpareprāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥapare niyatāhārāḥ prāṇān prāṇeṣu juhvati [29]
apare–Others; juhvati apāne prāṇam–bring the ascending air into union with the descending air while inhaling (pūraka). tathā–Likewise; (juhvati)–they offer; prāṇe apānam–the descending air into the ascending air while exhaling (rechaka); (cha)–and; ruddhvā–stopping; prāṇa-apāna-gatī–the flow of both prāṇa and apāna while retaining the breath (kumbhaka); prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ (bhavanti)–they arduously practise breath-control (prāṇāyām). apare–Others; juhvati–offer; prāṇān–the senses; prāṇeṣu–into the life-airs, the prāṇa-vāyu; niyata-āhārāḥ–by reducing their intake of food. [29]
29 Others practise breath-control. Closing the right nostril and inhaling through the left, they bring the ascending air into union with the descending; closing the left nostril and exhaling through the right, they similarly offer the descending air into the ascending; then closing both nostrils, they check both ascending and descending airs. Yet other practitioners of sense-control offer all the senses into the life-airs by reducing their food intake.
सर्व्वेऽप्येते यज्ञविदो यज्ञक्षयितकल्मषाः ।यज्ञशिष्टामृतभुजो यान्ति ब्रह्म सनातनम् ॥३०॥
sarve ’py ete yajña-vido yajña-kṣayita-kalmaṣāḥyajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo yānti brahma sanātanam [30]
ete sarve api–All these persons; yajñā-vidaḥ–are knowers of sacrifice. yajñā-kṣayitakalmaṣāḥ–Purified of sin by the performance of sacrifice; yajñā-śiṣṭa-amṛta-bhujaḥ–they enjoy the neatarean remnants of sacrifice; yānti sanātanam–and reach the eternal; brahma–Brahma, Absolute Truth. [30]
30 All these persons are knowers of sacrifice, purified by sacrifice. Enjoying the nectarean remnants of sacrifice, they attain to the eternal plane of the Absolute.
नायं लोकोऽस्त्ययज्ञस्य कुतोऽन्यः कुरुसत्तम ॥३१॥
nāyaṁ loko ’sty ayajñasya kuto ’nyaḥ kuru-sattama [31]
(he) kuru-sattama–O Arjuna, best of the Kurus; ayam lokaḥ (api)–even this world (or human plane of meagre pleasures); na asti–is denied; ayajñasya–a person who does not perform sacrifice. kutaḥ (prāptavyaḥ)–How, then, will it be possible for him to attain; anyaḥ (lokaḥ)–the next world (or heaven)? [31]
31 O Arjuna, foremost of the Kurus, without sacrifice one cannot attain fulfillment in this world, to say nothing of the next.
एवं बहुविधा यज्ञा वितता ब्रह्मणो मुखे ।कर्म्मजान्विद्धि तान्सर्व्वानेवं ज्ञात्वा विमोक्ष्यसे ॥३२॥
evaṁ bahu-vidhā yajñā vitatā brahmaṇo mukhekarma-jān viddhi tān sarvān evaṁ jñātvā vimokṣyase [32]
evam–In this way; bahu-vidhāḥ–many varieties of; yajñāḥ–sacrifices; vitatāḥ–have been elucidated; brahmaṇaḥ mukhe–by the mouthpiece of the Vedas. (tvam)–You; viddhi–should know; tān sarvān–all those sacrifices; karma-jān–to be born of action, in thought, word, and deed. jñātvā–Knowing; evam–this; vimokṣyase–you will be liberated from the bondage of action. [32]
32 Thus many types of sacrifice are described in the Vedas and allied scriptures. Know that they are all accomplished through action (of thought, word, and deed). Knowing this, you will be liberated from the bondage of action.
श्रेयान्द्रव्यमयाद्यज्ञाज्ज्ञानयज्ञः परन्तप ।सर्व्वं कर्म्माखिलं पार्थ ज्ञाने परिसमाप्यते ॥३३॥
śreyān dravyamayād yajñāj jñāna-yajñaḥ parantapasarvaṁ karmākhilaṁ pārtha jñāne parisamāpyate [33]
(he) parantapa pārtha–O Arjuna, subduer of the enemy; jñāna-yajñaḥ–‘knowledge-sacrifice’; śreyān–is better; yajñāt–than sacrifice; dravya-mayāt–of materials; (yataḥ)–since; sarvam–all; karma–action; akhilam–in its entirety, including its fruit; pari-samāpyate–has its consummation; jñāne–in knowledge. [33]
33 O Arjuna, subduer of the enemy, ‘knowledge-sacrifice’ is superior to the sacrifice of material objects, because the perfection of all action, including its fruit, is its culmination in knowledge.
तद्विद्धि प्रणिपातेन परिप्रश्नेन सेवया ।उपदेक्ष्यन्ति ते ज्ञानं ज्ञानिनस्तत्त्वदर्शिनः ॥३४॥
tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayāupadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ [34]
tat–Such knowledge; viddhi–should be known; praṇipātena–by submission, obeisances; paripraśnena–by relevant inquiry; sevayā–and by sincere service. jñāninaḥ–Those learned in the scriptures; tattva-darśinaḥ–endowed with divine revelation of the Supreme Absolute Truth; upadekṣyanti–will impart; jñānam–knowledge; te–to you. [34]
34 You will be able to attain knowledge by satisfying the divine master with submission, relevant inquiry, and sincere service. The enlightened souls who are learned in scriptural knowledge and endowed with direct realisation of the Supreme Absolute Truth will impart divine knowledge to you.
यज्ज्ञात्वा न पुनर्मोहमेवं यास्यसि पाण्डव ।येन भूतान्यशेषाणि द्रक्ष्यस्यात्मन्यथो मयि ॥३५॥
yaj jñātvā na punar moham evaṁ yāsyasi pāṇḍavayena bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi drakṣyasy ātmany atho mayi [35]
(he) pāṇḍava–O Arjuna, son of Pāṇḍu; jñātvā–knowing; yat (jñānam)–that knowledge; na yāsyasi–you will not be subject to; evam–such; moham–illusion; punaḥ–again. yena–By that knowledge; drakṣyasi–you will see; aśeṣāṇi bhūtāni–all species from highest to lowest; ātmani–in the ātmā–in their spiritual nature; (pṛthak upādhitvena)–though appearing in the forms of their various material designations; atha–and; (drakṣyasi)–you will see them; mayi–in Me. [35]
35 O Pāṇḍava, when you are enlightened by this knowledge of the reality, you will no longer be subject to your present illusion. You will see the one spiritual nature in all species of life, from highest to lowest, and that all are situated within Me.
अपि चेदसि पापेभ्यः सर्व्वेभ्यः पापकृत्तमः ।सर्व्वं ज्ञानप्लवेनैव वृजिनं सन्तरिष्यसि ॥३६॥
api ched asi pāpebhyaḥ sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛttamaḥsarvaṁ jñāna-plavenaiva vṛjinaṁ santariṣyasi [36]
api chet–Even if; asi–you are; pāpa-kṛttamaḥ–the most sinful; sarvebhyaḥ papebhyaḥ–of all sinners; (tathāpi)–nonetheless; santariṣyasi eva–you will cross; sarvam vṛjinam–all sins; jñāna-plavena–by the boat of knowledge. [36]
36 Even if you are the most sinful of all sinners, you will cross the ocean of sins by the boat of knowledge.
यथैधांसि समिद्धोऽग्निर्भस्मसात्कुरुतेऽर्ज्जुन ।ज्ञानाग्निः सर्व्वकर्म्माणि भस्मसात्कुरुते तथा ॥३७॥
yathaidhāṁsi samiddho ’gnir bhasmasāt kurute ’rjunajñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi bhasmasāt kurute tathā [37]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna, yathā–as; samiddhaḥ–blazing; agniḥ–fire; kurute–renders; edhāṁsi–firewood; bhasmasāt–to ashes; tathā–similarly; jñāna-agniḥ–the fire of knowledge; kurute–renders; sarva-karmāṇi–all karma (worldly actions and reactions in this life); bhasmasāt–to ashes. [37]
37 As a blazing fire renders wood to ashes, O Arjuna, the fire of knowledge burns up all worldly actions.
न हि ज्ञानेन सदृशं पवित्रमिह विद्यते ।तत्स्वयं योगसंसिद्धः कालेनात्मनि विन्दति ॥३८॥
na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ pavitram iha vidyatetat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ kālenātmani vindati [38]
iha–In this world, or, of the aforementioned practices of austerity, etc.; (kim api) na hi vidyate–there is nothing; pavitram–(as) pure; jñānena sadṛśam–as knowledge. yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ–A person successful in (niṣkām karma) yoga; vindati–realises; svayam–for himself; tat–that knowledge; ātmani–within the heart; kālena–after (a long) time. [38]
38 In this world, there is nothing as pure as knowledge. Eventually, a person who has achieved perfection in the yoga of selfless action naturally realises this knowledge within his heart.
श्रद्धावान्लभते ज्ञानं तत्परः संयतेन्द्रियः ।ज्ञानं लब्ध्वा परां शान्तिमचिरेणाधिगच्छति ॥३९॥
śraddhāvān labhate jñānaṁ tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥjñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim achireṇādhigachchati [39]
śraddhāvān–The faithful (having faith in the Lord’s words or the scriptures); tat-paraḥ–devoted; saṁyata-indriyaḥ–sense-controlled person; labhate–attains; jñānam–knowledge. labdhvā–Having attained; jñānam–enlightenment; achireṇa–quickly; adhi-gachhati–he attains; parām śāntim–supreme peace (beyond the mundane). [39]
39 It is the devoted, faithful, and sense-controlled person who attains knowledge. Achieving enlightenment, such a person soon attains the supreme peace.
अज्ञश्चाश्रद्दधानश्च संशयात्मा विनश्यति ।नायं लोकोऽस्ति न परो न सुखं संशयात्मनः ॥४०॥
ajñaś chāśraddadhānaś cha saṁśayātmā vinaśyatināyaṁ loko ’sti na paro na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ [40]
ajñaḥ–The ignorant (like an animal); cha–and; aśraddadhānaḥ–faithless (confused by many interpretations despite scriptural knowledge); saṁśaya-ātmā cha–and doubting person (who doubts he will succeed despite having some faith); vinaśyati–is ruined by misfortune. saṁśaya-ātmanaḥ–For the doubting person; na asti–there is no; sukham–happiness; na ayam lokaḥ–either in this world; na (cha) paraḥ–or the next. [40]
40 The ignorant, faithless, and doubting person is doomed to misfortune. For the doubting soul there can be happiness neither in this life nor the next.
योगसन्न्यस्तकर्म्माणं ज्ञानसञ्छिन्नसंशयम् ।आत्मवन्तं न कर्म्माणि निबध्नन्ति धनञ्जय ॥४१॥
yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ jñāna-sañchhinna-saṁśayamātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi nibadhnanti dhanañjaya [41]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Dhanañjaya; karmāṇi–actions; na nibadhnanti–cannot bind; yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇam–one who has ceased all action in accordance with the path of sannyās, abnegation, by practising niṣkām karma-yoga, the path of selfless action; jñāna-sañchhinna-saṁśayam–and overcome all his doubts by the cultivation of divine knowledge (sambandha-jñān, knowledge of the eternal serving relationship of the individual soul with the Lord); ātma-vantam–and who has realised the nature of the soul. [41]
41 O Dhanañjaya, renouncing all worldly actions by following the path of selfless action, one who severs all his doubts by knowledge and realises his internal divine nature, can never be bound by action.
तस्मादज्ञानसम्भूतं हृत्स्थं ज्ञानासिनात्मनः छित्त्वैनं संशयं योगमातिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ भारत ॥४२॥
tasmād ajñāna-sambhūtaṁ hṛt-sthaṁ jñānāsinātmanaḥchhittvainaṁ saṁśayaṁ yogam ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha bhārata [42]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; tasmāt–therefore; chhittvā–slashing; jñāna-asinā–by the sword of knowledge, sambandha-jñān; enam–these; saṁśayam–doubts; ātmanaḥ–of yours; hṛt-stham–in your heart; ajñāna-sambhūtam–which are born of ignorance; ātiṣṭha–take refuge in; yogam–niṣkām karma-yoga—the yoga of selfless action; (cha)–and; uttisṭha–arise for battle. [42]
42 Therefore, O Bhārat, with the sword of knowledge slash to shreds all these doubts in your heart, which are born of ignorance. Take refuge in selfless action and arise for battle!
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रेश्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे ज्ञानयोगो नाम चतुर्थोऽध्यायः ॥४॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahma-vidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvādejñāna-yogo nāma chaturtho ’dhyāyaḥ [4]
End of Chapter FourThe Path of Knowledgefrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Chapter Five Karma-sannyāsa-yoga The Path of Renunciation of Action
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
सन्न्यासं कर्म्मणां कृष्ण पुनर्योगञ्च शंससि ।यच्छ्रेय एतयोरेकं तन्मे ब्रूहि सुनिश्चितम् ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa punar yogañ cha śaṁsasiyach chhreya etayor ekaṁ tan me brūhi suniśchitam [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; (tvam)–You; śaṁsasi–speak of; sannyāsam–renunciation; karmaṇām–of actions; punaḥ–then again; yogam cha–application, yoga (of selfless action, niṣkām karma-yoga). me brūhi–Please tell me; suniśchitam–clearly; yat tat ekam–which one; etayoḥ–of the two; śreyaḥ–is superior. [1]
1 Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, you speak of renunciation of actions, and then again, You speak of the path of selfless action. Therefore, please tell me clearly which is superior.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
सन्न्यासः कर्म्मयोगश्च निःश्रेयसकरावुभौ ।तयोस्तु कर्म्मसन्न्यासात्कर्म्मयोगो विशिष्यते ॥२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś cha niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhautayos tu karma-sannyāsāt karma-yogo viśiṣyate [2]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: ubhau–both; sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaḥ cha–renunciation of action and the path of selfless action; niḥśreyasa-karau–bring great benefit; tu–but; tayoḥ–of these two; karma-yoga–the path of selfless action; viśiṣyate–is superior; karma-sannyāsāt–to renunciation of action. [2]
2 The Supreme Lord said: Both renunciation of action and the path of selfless action bring great benefit. Yet, of the two, know that the way of selfless action is superior.
ज्ञेयः स नित्यसन्न्यासी यो न द्वेष्टि न काङ्क्षति ।निर्द्वन्द्वो हि महाबाहो सुखं बन्धात्प्रमुच्यते ॥३॥
jñeyaḥ sa nitya-sannyāsī yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣatinirdvandvo hi mahā-bāho sukhaṁ bandhāt pramuchyate [3]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty-armed one; jñeyaḥ–it is to be known that; yaḥ–one who; na dveṣṭi–neither resents; na kāṅkṣati–nor desires; saḥ–that person; nitya-sannyāsī–is renounced, though performing action; hi–because; nirdvandvaḥ–one who is free from duality; sukham–is easily; pramuchyate–liberated; bandhāt–from bondage. [3]
3 O mighty-armed Arjuna, know that one who is free from attraction and aversion is truly renounced, though performing action; for one who is free from duality easily attains liberation from bondage.
साङ्ख्य योगौ पृथग्बालाः प्रवदन्ति न पण्डिताः ।एकमप्यास्थितः सम्यगुभयोर्विन्दते फलम् ॥४॥
sāṅkhya-yogau pṛthag bālāḥ pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag ubhayor vindate phalam [4]
bālāḥ–The childish, the unwise; pravadanti–say that; sāṅkhya-yogau–the paths of renunciation and (karma-) yoga; pṛthak–are separate; (tu)–but; paṇḍitāḥ–the learned; na (vadanti)–do not say this. samyak āsthitaḥ–A person who adopts perfectly; ekam api–only one; vindate–attains; phalam–the result; ubhayoḥ–of both. [4]
4 The path of renunciation (sāṅkhya-yoga) and the path of selfless action (karma-yoga) are considered separate paths by the unwise, but not by the learned. One who perfectly follows either of these paths will achieve the result of both.
यत्साङ्ख्यैः प्राप्यते स्थानं तद्योगैरपि गम्यते ।एकं साङ्ख्यं  च योगञ्च यः पश्यति स पश्यति ॥५॥
yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ tad yogair api gamyateekaṁ sāṅkhyañ cha yogañ cha yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati [5]
yat sthānam–That state which; prāpyate–is obtained; sāṅkhyaiḥ–by renunciation (sannyās); tat (sthānam)–that state; gamyate–is reached; yogaiḥ api–by niṣkām karma-yoga, too. yaḥ–One who; (vivekena)–by proper consideration; ekam paśyati–sees as one; sāṅkhyam cha yogam cha–both sannyās and karma-yoga; saḥ–he; paśyati–sees. [5]
5 The state achieved by the renunciation of action is also achieved by the performance of selfless action. One who sees these two paths to be one and the same, actually sees.
सन्न्यासस्तु महाबाहो दुःखमाप्तुमयोगतः ।योगयुक्तो मुनिर्ब्रह्म न चिरेणाधिगच्छति ॥६॥
sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho duḥkham āptum ayogataḥyoga-yukto munir brahma na chireṇādhigachchhati [6]
(he) mahā-bāho–O best of the valiant; ayogataḥ–without niṣkām karma-yoga; sannyāsaḥ–renunciation; (bhavati)–is; duḥkham āptum–the cause of sorrow; tu–but; yoga-yuktaḥ–one who performs niṣkām karma-yoga; muniḥ (san)–being a man of knowledge; na chireṇa–very soon; adhigachchhati–is able to attain to; brahma–the Absolute. [6]
6 O mighty hero, without selfless action, mere renunciation of action is the cause of sorrow. But the wise man who engages in selfless action swiftly attains to the Absolute.
योगयुक्तो विशुद्धात्मा विजितात्मा जितेन्द्रियः ।सर्व्वभूतात्मभूतात्मा कुर्व्वन्नपि न लिप्यते ॥७॥
yoga-yukto viśuddhātmā vijitātmā jitendriyaḥsarva-bhūtātmabhūtātmā kurvann api na lipyate [7]
yoga-yuktaḥ–Engaged in such a yoga process; viśuddha-ātmā–the clean-hearted person; vijita-ātmā–of controlled mind; jita-indriyaḥ–who has mastery over the senses; na lipyate–is not implicated; kurvan api–although performing action; sarva-bhūta-ātmabhūta-ātmā (san)–having reached the state in which his whole being is pervaded with affection and compassion for all beings. [7]
7 The clean-hearted person thus engaged in yoga controls his mind and senses. Becoming filled with affection and compassion for all beings, although fully active, he is never implicated by any action.
नैव किञ्चित्करोमीति युक्तो मन्येत तत्त्ववित् ।पश्यञ्शृण्वन्स्पृशञ्जिघ्रन्नश्नन्गच्छन्स्वपञ्श्वसन् ॥८॥
प्रलपन्विसृजन्गृह्णन्नुन्मिषन्निमिषन्नपि ।इन्द्रियाणीन्द्रियार्थेषु वर्त्तन्त इति धारयन् ॥९॥
naiva kiñchit karomīti yukto manyeta tattva-vitpaśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann aśnan gachchhan svapañ śvasan [8]
pralapan visṛjan gṛhṇann unmiṣan nimiṣann apiindriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu vartanta iti dhārayan [9]
yuktaḥ tattva-vit–The realised karma-yogī; api–athough engaged in the functions of; paśyan–seeing; śṛṇvan–hearing; spṛśan–touching; jighṛan–smelling; aśnan–eating; gachchhan–moving; svapan–sleeping; śvasan–breathing; pralapan–speaking; visṛjan–evacuating; gṛhṇan–grasping objects in the hands; unmiṣan–and opening; nimiṣan–and closing the eyes, or blinking; dhārayan–understanding; iti–that; indriyāṇi–the senses, viz., eyes, etc.; vartante–function; indriya-artheṣu–in relation to their respective sense objects of form, etc.; iti manyeta–thus considers: (aham)–“I; na karomi–do not do; kiñchit eva–anything”. [8–9]
8–9 The realised karma-yogī performs the activities of seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving, sleeping, breathing, speaking, evacuating, grasping objects, blinking the eyes, and so on, and he understands, “My sense organs—eyes, ears, skin, nose, and tongue—function in relation to their respective objects of form, sound, touch, smell, and taste.” Thus, he considers, “I do not perform any action at all.”
ब्रह्मण्याधाय कर्म्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा करोति यः ।लिप्यते न स पापेन पद्मपत्रमिवाम्भसा ॥१०॥
brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti yaḥlipyate na sa pāpena padma-patram ivāmbhasā [10]
yaḥ–One who; karoti–acts; ādhāya–by offering; karmāṇi–all actions; brahmaṇi–unto the Supreme Lord; tyaktvā–having given up; saṅgam–attachment; saḥ–he; na lipyate–is not affected; pāpena–by sin (or piety); padma-patram iva–as a lotus leaf; (na lipyate)–is not touched; ambhasā–by water. [10]
10 One who, though living in this world, selflessly offers all his actions to the Supreme Lord, is not polluted by sin, as a lotus leaf remains on the water yet is untouched by it.
कायेन मनसा बुद्ध्या केवलैरिन्द्रियैरपि ।योगिनः कर्म्म कुर्व्वन्ति सङ्गं त्यक्त्वात्मशुद्धये ॥११॥
kāyena manasā buddhyā kevalair indriyair apiyoginaḥ karma kurvanti saṅgaṁ tyaktvātma-śuddhaye [11]
tyaktvā–By giving up; saṅgam–attachment (to the fruits of action); yoginaḥ–the karma-yogīs; karma kurvanti–perform action; kevalaiḥ–merely; kāyena–by the body; manasā–by the mind; buddhyā–by the intelligence; api indriyaiḥ–and even by the senses; ātma-śuddhaye–for purification of the heart, self-purification. [11]
11 By giving up attachment, the karma-yogīs perform action merely through the body, mind, intelligence and even the senses, for self-purification.
युक्तः कर्म्मफलं त्यक्त्वा शान्तिमाप्नोति नैष्ठिकीम् ।अयुक्तः कामकारेण फले सक्तो निबध्यते ॥१२॥
yuktaḥ karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā śāntim āpnoti naiṣṭhikīmayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa phale sakto nibadhyate [12]
yuktaḥ–A niṣkām karma-yogī, one engaged in the yoga of selfless action; tyaktvā–giving up; karma-phalam–the fruits of action; āpnoti–attains; naiṣṭhikīm–uninterrupted; śāntim–peace, i.e. liberation; (kintu)–but; ayuktaḥ–a sakām karmī, fruitive worker; nibadhyate–becomes bound; saktaḥ (san)–being attached; phale–to the fruits of action; kāma-kāreṇa–by nurturing fruitive desires. [12]
12 Giving up attachment to the fruits of his actions, the materially unmotivated (niṣkām) karma-yogī attains constant peace, or liberation from actions and reactions. But the fruitive worker (sakām karmī) is attached to the fruits of his actions, and he becomes implicated by his endeavours.
सर्व्वकर्म्माणि मनसा सन्न्यस्यास्ते सुखं वशी ।नवद्वारे पुरे देही नैव कुर्व्वन्न कारयन् ॥१३॥
sarva-karmāṇi manasā sannyasyāste sukhaṁ vaśīnava-dvāre pure dehī naiva kurvan na kārayan [13]
manasā–Mentally; sannyasya–renouncing; sarva-karmāṇi–all actions; vaśī–the sense-controlled; dehī–embodied being; āste–resides; sukham–happily; nava-dvāre pure–in the city of nine gates; na eva kurvan–neither acting; na kārayan–nor causing work for others. [13]
13 Mentally renouncing all actions, the sense-controlled embodied living being resides happily within the city of nine gates*, neither acting nor causing work for others.
* The body of nine gates—two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, mouth, anus, and genital.
न कर्त्तृत्वं न कर्म्माणि लोकस्य सृजति प्रभुः ।न कर्म्मफलसंयोगं स्वभावस्तु प्रवर्त्तते ॥१४॥
na kartṛtvaṁ na karmāṇi lokasya sṛjati prabhuḥna karma-phala-saṁyogaṁ svabhāvas tu pravartate [14]
prabhuḥ–The Lord; na sṛjati–does not generate; lokasya–anyone’s; kartṛtvam–ego of considering themselves ‘the doer’; na karmāni–nor their actions; na karma-phala-saṁyogam–nor their association with the fruits of actions; tu–but; svabhāvaḥ–their nature (of ignorance since time immemorial); pravartate–initiates these. [14]
14 The Lord does not generate anyone’s ego of considering themselves ‘the doer’, nor their actions, nor their association with the fruits of their actions. These are all a result of their external nature of ignorance since time immemorial.
नादत्ते कस्यचित्पापं न चैव सुकृतं विभुः ।अज्ञानेनावृतं ज्ञानं तेन मुह्यन्ति जन्तवः ॥१५॥
nādatte kasyachit pāpaṁ na chaiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ tena muhyanti jantavaḥ [15]
vibhuḥ–The self-satisfied Supreme Lord; ādatte–accepts; na pāpam–neither the sin; sukṛtam cha na eva–nor the peity; kasyachit–of anyone. jñānam–Knowledge; (bhavati)–is; āvṛtam–covered; ajñānena–by ignorance—by the Lord’s external potency (avidyā-śakti), to fulfill the living being’s desire to enjoy the material world; tena–thus; jantavaḥ–the living beings (though spiritual in constitution); muhyanti–are deluded, thinking the body to be the self. [15]
15 The Supreme Lord accepts neither the sin nor the piety of anyone. The living beings fall into illusion because their knowledge is covered by ignorance.
ज्ञानेन तु तदज्ञानं येषां नाशितमात्मनः ।तेषामादित्यवज्ज्ञानं प्रकाशयति तत्परम् ॥१६॥
jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ yeṣāṁ nāśitam ātmanaḥteṣām ādityavaj jñānaṁ prakāśayati tat param [16]
tu–But; yeṣām–of those for whom; tat ajñānam–that ignorance; nāśitam–has been destroyed; ātmanaḥ jñānena–by self-knowledge, by the Lord’s superior potency; tat jñānam–that knowledge; teṣām–of those persons; prakāśayati–reveals; param–the Supreme Reality; ādityavat–like the sun that dispels darkness. [16]
16 For persons whose divine knowledge has awakened, their ignorance is destroyed, and their wisdom, like the shining sun, reveals the Supreme Reality.
तद्बुद्धयस्तदात्मानस्तन्निष्ठास्तत्परायणाः ।गच्छन्त्यपुनरावृत्तिं ज्ञाननिर्धूतकल्मषाः ॥१७॥
tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas tan-niṣṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥgachchhanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ [17]
jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ–Persons whose ignorance has been destroyed by knowledge; tat-buddhayaḥ–who think constantly of the Supreme Lord; tat-ātmānaḥ–who meditate on Him alone; tat-niṣṭhāḥ–who abide in Him always; tat-parāyaṇāḥ–and who are devoted to hearing and singing His glories; (santaḥ)–being so engaged; gachchhanti–they attain; apunaḥ-āvṛttim–liberation. [17]
17 Those whose illusion has been completely dispelled by knowledge always think of Me, the Supreme Lord; I am their meditation, and they abide in Me alone, hearing and singing My unending glories in pure devotion. Thus, they are liberated from the mundane.
विद्याविनयसम्पन्ने ब्राह्मणे गवि हस्तिनि ।शुनि चैव श्वपाके च पण्डिताः समदर्शिनः ॥१८॥
vidyā-vinaya-sampanne brāhmaṇe gavi hastiniśuni chaiva śvapāke cha paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [18]
sama-darśinaḥ eva–Those who see with equanimity, who see Brahma, transcendence; vidyā-vinaya-sampanne–in a learned and humble; brāhmaṇe–brāhmaṇ; gavi–a cow; hastini–an elephant; śuni cha–and a dog; śvapake cha–or a chaṇḍāl (dog-eater or outcast); (kathyate)–(such seers) are to be known as; paṇḍitāḥ–truly learned. [18]
18 The enlightened souls see transcendence within all living beings, whether the humble and learned brāhmaṇ, the cow, the elephant, the dog, or the dog-eater. Therefore, they are to be known as paṇḍit—men of true wisdom.
इहैव तैर्जितः सर्गो येषां साम्ये स्थितं मनः ।निर्द्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म तस्माद्ब्रह्मणि ते स्थिताः ॥१९॥
ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥnirdoṣaṁ hi samaṁ brahma tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ [19]
yeṣām–For those whose; manaḥ–mind; sthitam–is situated; sāmye–equipoised in Brahma; sargaḥ–the cycle of birth and death; jitaḥ–is conquered; taiḥ–by them; eva iha–while living within this world. brahma samam hi–Possessing spiritual equanimity; nirdoṣam–and being faultless (free from attachment and hatred); tasmāt–thus; te–they; brahmaṇi sthitāḥ–are situated in Brahma. [19]
19 Those whose minds are equipoised in Brahma have conquered the cycle of birth and death while living within this world. By their perfect spiritual equanimity, they are always situated in transcendence.
न प्रहृष्येत्प्रियं प्राप्य नोद्विजेत्प्राप्य चाप्रियम् ।स्थिरबुद्धिरसम्मूढो ब्रह्मविद्ब्रह्मणि स्थितः ॥२०॥
na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya nodvijet prāpya chāpriyamsthira-buddhir asammūḍho brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ [20]
brahmaṇi sthitāḥ–Fully situated in Brahma; sthira-buddhiḥ–endowed with steady intelligence; asammūdhaḥ–devoid of the delusion of considering one’s body and its attachments as ‘me’ and ‘mine’; brahma-vit–one in knowledge of Brahma; na prahṛṣyet–is neither elated; priyam prāpya–by obtaining something desirable; na cha udvijet–nor dejected; apriyam prāpya–by obtaining something undesirable. [20]
20 Absorbed in transcendence, endowed with steady intelligence, and free from the delusion of thinking of the body and associated objects as ‘me’ and ‘mine,’ the knower of the Absolute is neither happy when pleasant things come his way nor sad when unpleasant things come his way.
बाह्यस्पर्शेष्वसक्तात्मा विन्दत्यात्मनि यत्सुखम् ।स ब्रह्मयोगयुक्तात्मा सुखमक्षयमश्नुते ॥२१॥
bāhya-sparśeṣv asaktātmā vindaty ātmani yat sukhamsa brahma-yoga-yuktātmā sukham akṣayam aśnute [21]
asakta-ātmā–The person with mind detached; bāhya-sparśeṣu–from external (sense-) enjoyment; (adau)–first; vindati–tastes; (tat) sukham–that happiness; yat ātmani (anubhūyamāne)–which is experienced in self-realisation; (tataḥ)–then; brahma-yoga-yukta-ātmā–absorbing himself in meditation on the Absolute; saḥ–such a person; aśnute–enjoys; akṣayam–inexhaustible; sukham–bliss. [21]
21 Detaching his mind from external pleasures, such a knower of the Absolute Truth tastes the inner joy of self-realisation. Then, absorbing himself in meditation on the Absolute, he experiences inexhaustible bliss.
ये हि संस्पर्शजा भोगा दुःखयोनय एव ते ।आद्यन्तवन्तः कौन्तेय न तेषु रमते बुधः ॥२२॥
ye hi saṁsparśajā bhogā duḥkha-yonaya eva teādy-antavantaḥ kaunteya na teṣu ramate budhaḥ [22]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna; ye bhogāḥ–those pleasures; saṁsparśa-jāḥ–born of the senses contacting their objects; te duḥkha-yonayaḥ eva–are the origin of misery; hi–as; ādi-antavantaḥ–they begin and end. (ataḥ)–Therefore; budhaḥ–the wise person; na ramate–does not delight; teṣu–in them. [22]
22 O son of Kuntī, the pleasures that arise from the contact of the senses with their objects are the cause of unhappiness, as they are transient. The wise never delight in such pleasures.
शक्नोतीहैव यः सोढुं प्राक्शरीरविमोक्षणात् ।कामक्रोधोद्भवं वेगं स युक्तः स सुखी नरः ॥२३॥
śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇātkāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ [23]
yaḥ–One who; śaknoti–is able (by the yoga of selfless action); soḍhum–to check; kāma-krodha-udbhavam vegam–the impulses of desire and anger; iha eva–in this life; prāk–before; śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt–leaving the body; saḥ naraḥ–that person; yuktaḥ–is a yogī; saḥ–he; sukhī–is happy. [23]
23 Know that one who, before leaving the body, utilises the opportunity of this life to check the impulses of desire and anger—he is a yogī who knows true happiness.
योऽन्तःसुखोऽन्तरारामस्तथान्तर्ज्योतिरेव यः ।स योगी ब्रह्मनिर्व्वाणं ब्रह्मभूतोऽधिगच्छति ॥२४॥
yo ’ntaḥ-sukho ’ntar-ārāmas tathāntar-jyotir eva yaḥsa yogī brahma-nirvāṇaṁ brahma-bhūto ’dhigachchhati [24]
yaḥ–One who; antaḥ-sukhaḥ–experiences the joy of the self within; antaḥ-ārāmaḥ–who delights in the self within; tathā yaḥ–and who; eva–in this way; antaḥ-jyotiḥ–sees the illumination within; saḥ yogī–such a (niṣkām karma-) yogī (follower of the yoga of selfless action); brahma-bhūtaḥ–attaining the transcendental state; adhigachchhati–achieves; brahma-nirvāṇam–liberation in Brahma; in the personal conception, he reaches the Supersoul, Paramātmā. [24]
24 Such a yogī sees the self within and delights in the bliss of the self within. Attaining the transcendental state, he attains liberation from matter (and entry into the abode of Brahma).
लभन्ते ब्रह्मनिर्व्वाणमृषयः क्षीणकल्मषाः ।छिन्नद्वैधा यतात्मानः सर्व्वभूतहिते रताः ॥२५॥
labhante brahma-nirvāṇam ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥchhinna-dvaidhā yatātmānaḥ sarva-bhūta-hite-ratāḥ [25]
kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ–Sinless; yata-ātmānaḥ–self-controlled; ṛṣayaḥ–sages; chinna-dvaidhāḥ–with doubts destroyed; sarva-bhūta-hite-ratāḥ–dedicated to the welfare of all; labhante–attain; brahma-nirvāṇam–liberation from the mundane plane. [25]
25 Sinless, free from doubt, self-controlled, and dedicated to the welfare of all living beings, the seers of truth attain such liberation.
कामक्रोधविमुक्तानां यतीनां यतचेतसाम् ।अभितो ब्रह्मनिर्व्वाणं वर्त्तते विदितात्मनाम् ॥२६॥
kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ yatīnāṁ yata-chetasāmabhito brahma-nirvāṇaṁ vartate viditātmanām [26]
yatīnām–Of the sannyāsīs; yata-chetasām–who have controlled their thoughts (conquered the subtle body); vidita-ātmanām–who are knowers of the element tvam, the soul; kāma-krodha-vimuktānām–and free from desire and anger; brahma-nirvāṇam–liberation from matter; vartate–occurs; abhitaḥ–either way, whether they live or die. [26]
26 Persons of the renounced order who have controlled their thoughts, who are free from desire and anger, and who have achieved knowledge of the nature of the soul, are liberated whether they live or die.
स्पर्शान्कृत्वा बहिर्बाह्यांश्चक्षुश्चैवान्तरे भ्रुवोः ।प्राणापानौ समौ कृत्वा नासाभ्यन्तरचारिणौ ॥२७॥
यतेन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिर्मुनिर्मोक्षपरायणः ।विगतेच्छाभयक्रोधो यः सदा मुक्त एव सः ॥२८॥
sparśān kṛtvā bahir bāhyāṁś chakṣuś chaivāntare bhruvoḥprāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā nāsābhyantara-chāriṇau [27]
yatendriya-mano-buddhir munir mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥvigatechchhā-bhaya-krodho yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ [28]
yaḥ–That person who; bahiḥ kṛtvā–expelling; bāhyān sparśān–external sense objects of sound, etc.; (manaḥ praviṣṭān)–which enter the mind; cha eva (kṛtvā)–and concentrating; chakṣuḥ–the eyes; antare–between; bhruvoḥ–the eyebrows; kṛtvā samau–stabilising; prāṇa-apānau–inhalation and exhalation; nāsā-abhyantara-chāriṇau–flowing through the nostrils; (yaḥ)–that person who; yata-indriya-manaḥ-buddhiḥ–is a controller of the senses, mind, and intelligence; mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ–dedicated to liberation; vigata-ichchhā-bhaya-krodhaḥ–free from desire, fear, and anger; muniḥ–a contemplative seeker of the self; saḥ–he; sadā–is always; mukta eva–actually liberated. [27–28]
27–28 Expelling from the mind all the external sense objects of sound, touch, form, taste, and smell; centering the concentration and stabilising the incoming and outgoing breath; subjugating the senses, mind, and intelligence; dedicating himself to liberation; his desire, fear, and anger gone, such a sage is ever liberated.
भोक्तारं यज्ञतपसां सर्व्वलोकमहेश्वरम् ।सुहृदं सर्व्वभूतानां ज्ञात्वा मां शान्तिमृच्छति ॥२९॥
bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaramsuhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛchchhati [29]
(jīvaḥ)–The living being; ṛchchhati–attains; śāntim–the joy of his original divine identity; jñātvā–by knowing; mām–Me; bhoktāram–as the maintainer, or worshippable objective; yajña-tapasām–of the karmīs’ sacrifices and the jñānīs’ austerities; sarva-loka-mahā-īśvaram–the worshippable Supreme Lord of all planes—Lord Nārāyaṇ; suhṛdam sarva-bhūtānām–and the benefactor of all living beings by mercifully teaching pure devotion to Me, through My devotees, since I am the adorable friend of the devotees—Lord Kṛṣṇa. [29]
29 I am the enjoyer and objective of the sacrifices performed by persons of action, and of the austerities performed by persons of knowledge. I am Nārāyaṇ, the indwelling monitor of all planes of life, the worshippable Supreme Personality who awards liberation. I am Kṛṣṇa, the well-wisher of all and the dear friend of the devotees. One who knows Me thus, attains the bliss of knowing his own original divine identity.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रेश्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे कर्म्मसन्न्यासयोगो नाम पञ्चमोऽध्यायः ॥५॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahma-vidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde karma-sannyāsa-yogo nāma pañchamo ’dhyāyaḥ [5]
End of Chapter FiveThe Path of Renunciation of Actionfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Chapter Six Dhyāna-yoga The Path of Meditation
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
अनाश्रितः कर्म्मफलं कार्य्यं कर्म्म करोति यः ।स सन्न्यासी च योगी च न निरग्निर्न चाक्रियः ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥsa sannyāsī cha yogī cha na niragnir na chākriyaḥ [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: yaḥ–That person who; karoti–performs; kāryam–compulsory; karma–scripturally enjoined actions; anāśritaḥ–without expectation; karma-phalam–of the fruits of action; saḥ cha–he is; sannyāsī–a sannyāsī, one who has given up all for the Lord; yogī cha–and he is a yogī, one in union with the Lord. na niragniḥ–A sannyāsī is not one who merely renounces the fire sacrifice (agnihotra yajña) and other prescribed duties; na cha akriyaḥ–nor is a yogī one who merely renounces physical activities. [1]
1 The Supreme Lord said: Know a genuine sannyāsī and yogī as one who, without expectation of the fruits of his actions, performs his duties as prescribed by the scriptures. One is not a sannyāsī merely by renouncing the performance of the fire sacrifice and other prescribed duties, and one is not a yogī merely by becoming physically inactive.
यं सन्न्यासमिति प्राहुर्योगं तं विद्धि पाण्डव ।न ह्यसन्न्यस्तसङ्कल्पो योगी भवति कश्चन ॥२॥
yaṁ sannyāsam iti prāhur yogaṁ taṁ viddhi pāṇḍavana hy asannyasta-saṅkalpo yogī bhavati kaśchana [2]
(he) pāṇḍavaḥ–O Arjuna; yam–that which; (sudhiyaḥ)–the learned; prāhuḥ–call; sannyāsam iti–sannyās, complete renunciation; viddhi–you should know; tam (eva) yogam–as yoga; hi–since; asannyasta-saṅkalpaḥ–without renunciation of fruitive attachment (the basis of niṣkām karma-yoga); na kaśchana–no one; bhavati–can be; yogī–a yogī. [2]
2 O Arjuna, that which is known as sannyās (complete renunciation) you should know to be yoga, since without renouncing fruitive desire no one can be a yogī.
आरुरुक्षोर्मुनेर्योगं कर्म्म कारणमुच्यते ।योगारूढस्य तस्यैव शमः कारणमुच्यते ॥३॥
ārurukṣor muner yogaṁ karma kāraṇam uchyateyogārūḍhasya tasyaiva śamaḥ kāraṇam uchyate [3]
muneḥ–For the yoga practitioner; ārurukṣoḥ–desirous of ascending; yogam–to steady yoga meditation; (tad ārohe)–in the ascent of yoga; karma–action; uchyate–is said; kāraṇam–to be the means. tasya eva yoga-ārūḍhasya–For that person accomplished in yoga, that is, when he has achieved meditation; śamaḥ–renunciation of all action; uchyate–is described; kāraṇam–as the means. [3]
3 For the yoga practitioner desirous of attaining steady yoga meditation, action is said to be the means. When he has achieved yoga meditation, renunciation of all action is said to be the means of remaining in meditation.
यदा हि नेन्द्रियार्थेषु न कर्म्मस्वनुषज्जते ।सर्व्वसङ्कल्पसन्न्यासी योगारूढस्तदोच्यते ॥४॥
yadā hi nendriyārtheṣu na karmasv anuṣajjatesarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī yogārūḍhas tadochyate [4]
yadā hi–When; (yogī)–the yoga practitioner; na anuṣajjate–does not become attached; indriya-artheṣu–to the objects of the senses—sound, touch, form, taste, and smell; na (anuṣajjate) karmasu (cha)–and does not become attached to action in pursuit of their enjoyment; sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī (cha bhavati)–and renounces all thoughts of enjoyment; tadā–then; uchyate yoga-ārūḍhaḥ–he is said to have attained to yoga. [4]
4 When the yoga practitioner does not become attached to the objects of the senses, and to any action in pursuit of their enjoyment, and renounces all thoughts of enjoyment, then he is said to have attained to yoga.
उद्धरेदात्मनात्मानं नात्मानमवसादयेत् ।आत्मैव ह्यात्मनो बन्धुरात्मैव रिपुरात्मनः ॥५॥
uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ nātmānam avasādayetātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ [5]
ātmānam–The living being; uddharet–must be delivered from the bondage of the material world; ātmanā–by the (detached) mind; ātmānam–and the living being; na avasādayet–must not be made to fall down into the bondage of the material world; (ātmanā)–by the mind (enchanted by sense objects); hi–since; ātmā eva–this very mind; bandhuḥ–is the friend; ātmānaḥ–of the living being; ātmā eva–and this very mind; ripuḥ–is the enemy; ātmānaḥ–of the living being. [5]
5 One must elevate himself by the mind, not degrade himself by the mind; for the mind is sometimes the friend of the living being, and in another situation that very mind is his enemy.
बन्धुरात्मात्मनस्तस्य येनैवात्मात्मना जितः ।अनात्मनस्तु शत्रुत्वे वर्त्तेतात्मैव शत्रुवत् ॥६॥
bandhur ātmātmanas tasya yenaivātmātmanā jitaḥanātmanas tu śatrutve vartetātmaiva śatruvat [6]
yena ātmanā–For one by whom; ātmā–the mind; jitaḥ–has been subjugated; tasya ātmānaḥ–that person’s; ātmā eva–very mind; bandhuḥ–is a friend; tu–but; anātmanaḥ–for a person of uncontrolled mind; ātmā eva–that very mind; varteta–is engaged; śatrutve–in disservice; śatruvat–like an enemy. [6]
6 For one who has conquered the mind, his mind is his friend. For one unable to control the mind, his mind works against him like an enemy.
जितात्मनः प्रशान्तस्य परमात्मा समाहितः ।शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु तथा मानापमानयोः ॥७॥
jitātmanaḥ praśāntasya param ātmā samāhitaḥśītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu tathā mānāpamānayoḥ [7]
śīta-uṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu–In cold and heat, happiness and unhappiness; tathā māna-apamānayoḥ–and in honour and dishonour; ātmā–the mind; praśāntasya–of the peaceful (without attraction and aversion); jitātmanaḥ–yogī who has conquered the mind; (bhavet)–is; param samāhitaḥ–in perfect samādhi. [7]
7 The yogī who has conquered the mind remains deeply absorbed in yogic trance, peaceful, and undisturbed by cold and heat, happiness and unhappiness, or honour and dishonour.
ज्ञानविज्ञानतृप्तात्मा कूटस्थो विजितेन्द्रियः ।युक्त इत्युच्यते योगी समलोष्ट्राश्मकाञ्चनः ॥८॥
jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā kūṭastho vijitendriyaḥyukta ity uchyate yogī sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñchanaḥ [8]
yogī–The yogī; jñāna-vijñāna-tṛpta-ātmā–satisfied in his heart by scriptural knowledge as well as realisation; kūṭa-sthaḥ–situated in the one unchanging spiritual nature; vijita-indriyaḥ–sense-controlled; sama-loṣṭra-aśma-kāñchanaḥ–and of equal vision for earth, stone, and gold; uchyate–is said; yuktaḥ iti–to have attained yoga. [8]
8 One who is always satisfied within by both knowledge and realisation, who is always fixed in his spiritual nature, who is sense-controlled, and who has the vision of equality for a clod of earth, a rock, or gold—it is said that such a person has attained yoga.
सुहृन्मित्रार्युदासीनमध्यस्थद्वेष्यबन्धुषु ।साधुष्वपि च पापेषु समबुद्धिर्विशिष्यते ॥९॥
suhṛn-mitrāry-udāsīna-madhyastha-dveṣya-bandhuṣusādhuṣv api cha pāpeṣu sama-buddhir viśiṣyate [9]
sama-buddhiḥ–One of equipoised intelligence; suhṛt-mitra-ari-udāsīna-madhya-stha-dveṣya-bandhuṣu–towards a well-wisher, a friend, an enemy, an indifferent person, a mediator, a hateful person, a relative; sādhuṣu–a saintly person; pāpeṣu cha api–and a sinner, too; viśiṣyate–such a yogī is well-qualified. [9]
9 Such an eminent yogī has the vision of equality towards a well-wisher, a friend, an enemy, an indifferent person, a mediator, a hateful person, a relative, a saint, and a sinner.
योगी युञ्जीत सततमात्मानं रहसि स्थितः  ।एकाकी यतचित्तात्मा निराशीरपरिग्रहः ॥१०॥
yogī yuñjīta satatam ātmānaṁ rahasi sthitaḥekākī yata-chittātmā nirāśīr aparigrahaḥ [10]
yogī–The practising yogī; sthitaḥ–remaining; ekākī–alone; rahasi–in a solitary place; yata-chitta-ātmā–controlling mind and body; nirāśīḥ–desireless; aparigrahaḥ–without enjoyable objects or acquisition; yuñjīta ātmānam–must concentrate his mind; satatam–constantly. [10]
10 The yogī should constantly concentrate his mind by remaining alone in a solitary place, his mind and body controlled, free from desire and acquisition.
शुचौ देशे प्रतिष्ठाप्य स्थिरमासनमात्मनः ।नात्युच्छ्रितं नातिनीचं चेलाजिनकुशोत्तरम् ॥११॥
तत्रैकाग्रं मनः कृत्वा यतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रियः ।उपविश्यासने युञ्ज्याद्योगमात्मविशुद्धये ॥१२॥
śuchau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥnāty-uchchhritaṁ nāti-nīchaṁ chelājina-kuśottaram [11]
tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā yata-chittendriya-kriyaḥupaviśyāsane yuñjyād yogam ātma-viśuddhaye [12]
pratiṣṭhāpya–Establishing; ātmānaḥ–his; āsanam–seat; chela-ajina-kuśa-uttaram–of Kuśa grass, deerskin, and cloth; śuchau deśe–in a clean place; sthiram–which is firm; na ati-uchchhritam–neither too high; na ati-nīcham–nor too low; upaviśya–sitting; tatra āsane–on that seat; yata-chitta-indriya-kriyaḥ–subjugating all mental and sensual activity; kṛtvā–making; manaḥ–the mind; eka-agram–one-pointed; yuñjyāt–he should practise; yogam–samādhi; ātma-viśuddhaye–for self-purification, to attain spiritual realisation. [11–12]
11–12 In a clean place, not too high and not too low, the yogī should establish a firm seat of Kuśa grass, deerskin, and cloth. Then, sitting on that seat, subjugating all mental and sensual activity, with one-pointed concentration he should practise meditational trance in order to purify his heart.
समं कायशिरोग्रीवं धारयन्नचलं स्थिरः ।सम्प्रेक्ष्य नासिकाग्रं स्वं दिशश्चानवलोकयन् ॥१३॥
प्रशान्तात्मा विगतभीर्ब्रह्मचारिव्रते स्थितः ।मनः संयम्य मच्चित्तो युक्त आसीत मत्परः ॥१४॥
samaṁ kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ dhārayann achalaṁ sthiraḥsamprekṣya nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ diśaś chānavalokayan [13]
praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr brahmachāri-vrate sthitaḥmanaḥ saṁyamya mach-chitto yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ [14]
dhārayan–Holding; kāya-śiraḥ-grīvam–the body, head, and neck; samam–straight; achalam–still; sthiraḥ–and poised; samprekṣya–gazing at; svam nāsikā–his nose; agram–at the top, between the eyes (centering the concentration); cha anavalokayan–not looking; diśaḥ–in all directions; brahmachāri-vrate-sthitaḥ–remaining fixed in spirituality (or celibacy); praśānta-ātmā–with a peaceful heart; vigata-bhīḥ–and fearless; manaḥ saṁyamya–subjugating the mind; yuktaḥ–the yogī; mat-paraḥ–devoted to Me; āsīta–should remain; mat-chittaḥ–absorbed in thought of Me. [13–14]
13–14 Soberly keeping his body, head, and neck straight and upright, poised, the yogī should fix his gaze at one point, as though between the eyes, without casting a glance in any direction. Tranquil, fearless, and reposed in the vow of celibacy, he should meditate on Me (as four-armed Viṣṇu), and devoting himself to Me, he should thus practise yoga.
युञ्जन्नेवं सदात्मानं योगी नियतमानसः ।शान्तिं निर्व्वाणपरमां मत्संस्थामधिगच्छति ॥१५॥
yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ yogī niyata-mānasaḥśāntiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ mat-saṁsthām adhigachchhati [15]
evam–In this manner; sadā–constantly; yuñjan ātmānam–engaging the mind in yogic meditation; yogī–the yogī; niyata-mānasaḥ–of mind withdrawn from hankering for material enjoyment; adhigachchhati–attains to; śāntim–the peace; nirvāṇa-paramām–of emancipation by the destruction of material existence; mat-saṁsthām–(the peace) which abides in Me (in My non-differentiated Brahma effulgence [Śrīla Viśvanāth Chakravartī Ṭhākur.]). [15]
15 In this way, constantly absorbing his mind in meditation (dhyāna-yoga), the yogī who has ceased hankering for material enjoyment achieves the peace of liberation from mundanity, the peace which abides in Me (in my Brahma effulgence).
नात्यश्नतस्तु योगोऽस्ति न चैकान्तमनश्नतः ।न चातिस्वप्नशीलस्य जाग्रतो नैव चार्ज्जुन ॥१६॥
nāty-aśnatas tu yogo ’sti na chaikāntam anaśnataḥna chāti-svapna-śīlasya jāgrato naiva chārjuna [16]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; yogaḥ–yoga, samādhi; na asti–is not; ati-aśnataḥ tu–for the overeater; na cha–nor; ekāntam anaśnataḥ–for the oversleeper; na cha–nor; ati-svapna-śīlasya–for one who oversleeps; na cha–nor; eva jāgratah–for one who remains awake excessively. [16]
16 O Arjuna, yoga cannot be practised by one who overeats, undereats, oversleeps, or undersleeps.
युक्ताहारविहारस्य युक्तचेष्टस्य कर्म्मसु ।युक्तस्वप्नावबोधस्य योगो भवति दुःखहा ॥१७॥
yuktāhāra-vihārasya yukta-cheṣṭasya karmasuyukta-svapnāvabodhasya yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā [17]
yukta-āhāra-vihārasya–For the person whose eating and recreation are regulated; yukta-cheṣṭasya-karmasu–whose effort in works is regulated; yukta-svapna-avabodhasya–and whose sleeping and waking hours are in proper measure; yogaḥ–yoga; bhavati–is; duḥka-hā–a dispeller of suffering. [17]
17 For a person who eats, relaxes, and works in a regulated way, and who keeps regular hours in proper measure, his practice of yoga dispells all his suffering.
यदा विनियतं चित्तमात्मन्येवावतिष्ठते ।निःस्पृहः सर्व्वकामेभ्यो युक्त इत्युच्यते तदा ॥१८॥
yadā viniyataṁ chittam ātmany evāvatiṣṭhateniḥspṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo yukta ity ucyate tadā [18]
yadā–When; viniyatam–the disciplined; chittam–heart; avatiṣṭhate–dwells; ātmani eva–in the soul alone; tadā–then; niḥspṛhaḥ–that person detached; sarva-kāmebhyaḥ–from all desires; uchyate–is described; yuktaḥ iti–as actually in yoga. [18]
18 When a yogī withdraws the mind from mundane thoughts and centres it unwaveringly in the self, then, free from mundane desires, he is said to be actually situated in yoga, or linked with the Absolute.
यथा दीपो निवातस्थो नेङ्गते सोपमा स्मृता ।योगिनो यतचित्तस्य युञ्जतो योगमात्मनः ॥१९॥
yathā dīpo nivāta-stho neṅgate sopamā smṛtāyogino yata-chittasya yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ [19]
yathā–As; dīpaḥ–a lamp-flame; nivāta-sthaḥ–in a windless place; na iṅgate–does not waver; sā–such; upamā–an analogy; smṛtā–is cited; yoginaḥ–of the yogī; ātmanaḥ–the soul-centred; yogam–yoga; yuñjataḥ–practitioner; yata-chittasya–of unwavering one-pointed mind. [19]
19 It is said, as a lamp-flame situated in a windless place does not waver, similarly, the mind of the yogī absorbed in the self never flickers in its concentration.
यत्रोपरमते चित्तं निरुद्धं योगसेवया ।यत्र चैवात्मनात्मानं पश्यन्नात्मनि तुष्यति ॥२०॥
सुखमात्यन्तिकं यत्तद्बुद्धिग्राह्यमतीन्द्रियम् ।वेत्ति यत्र न चैवायं स्थितश्चलति तत्त्वतः ॥२१॥
यं लब्ध्वा चापरं लाभं मन्यते नाधिकं ततः ।यस्मिन्स्थितो न दुःखेन गुरुणापि विचाल्यते ॥२२॥
तं विद्याद्दुःखसंयोगवियोगं योगसंज्ञितम् ।स निश्चयेन योक्तव्यो योगोऽनिर्व्विण्ण चेतसा ॥२३॥
yatroparamate chittaṁ niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayāyatra chaivātmanātmānaṁ paśyann ātmani tuṣyati [20]
sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyamvetti yatra na chaivāyaṁ sthitaś chalati tattvataḥ [21]
yaṁ labdhvā chāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥyasmin sthito na duḥkhena guruṇāpi vichālyate [22]
taṁ vidyād duḥkha-saṁyoga-viyogaṁ yoga-saṁjñitamsa niśchayena yoktavyo yogo ’nirviṇṇa-chetasā [23]
yatra–That (samādhi) within which; chittam–the mind; niruddham–disciplined; yoga-sevayā–by yoga practice; uparamate–is tranquil (relieved from mundane association); cha–and; yatra–within which; paśyan–having observed; ātmānam–the Supersoul, Paramātmā; ātmanā–by the pure self of the same nature as the Supersoul; tuṣyati–one is satisfied; ātmani eva–only in Him; (cha)–and; yatra–by which; ayam–this yogī; vetti tat–experiences that; ātyantikam–constant; sukham–bliss; ati-indriyam–transcendental to the senses; yat–which is; buddhi-grāhyam–known by spiritual enlightenment; cha–and; (yatra) sthitaḥ (san)–being situated within which; na eva chalati–one never deviates; tattvataḥ–from reality; (cha)–and; yam labdhvā–gaining which; na manyate–one does not consider; aparam lābham–any other attainment; adhikam–greater; tataḥ–than that; cha–and; yasmin sthitaḥ (san)–being situated within which; na vichālyate–one is not disturbed; guruṇā duḥkhena api–even by intense suffering; vidyāt–know; tam–that; duḥkha-saṁyoga-viyogam–state within which all association with unhappiness is severed; yoga-saṁjñitam–to be defined as yoga. yoktavyah–One should practise; saḥ yogaḥ–this yoga; niśchayena–with perseverance; anirviṇṇa-chetasā–and a heart that is never discouraged. [20–23]
20–23 The mind controlled by yoga practice is tranquil, pacified by detachment from mundane association. The yogī remains satisfied in the Lord alone, directly seeing the Supersoul through his purified consciousness. In his spiritual enlightenment, he tastes transcendental, eternal bliss. He never deviates from the reality. He considers that there is no greater gain in this world. He is undisturbed by even the worst suffering. Know that the attainment of such a state, in which all association with unhappiness is severed, is called yoga. Yoga must be practised with perseverance and a heart that is never discouraged.
सङ्कल्पप्रभवान्कामांस्त्यक्त्वा सर्व्वानशेषतः ।मनसैवेन्द्रियग्रामं विनियम्य समन्ततः ॥२४॥
saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥmanasaivendriya-grāmaṁ viniyamya samantataḥ [24]
(yoktavyaḥ)–Such yoga must be practised; tyaktvā–giving up; sarvān kāmān–all desires; saṅkalpa-prabhavān–born of the thoughts; aśeṣataḥ–completely (including all impressions); manasā eva–and by the mind (with the vision of the futility of mundane enjoyment); viniyamya–withdrawing; indriya-grāmam–the group of senses; samantataḥ–from all material objects. [24]
24 To practise yoga one must abandon all thoughts that give rise to desires, and using the mind, withdraw the senses from all material objects.
शनैः शनैरुपरमेद्बुद्ध्या धृतिगृहीतया ।आत्मसंस्थं मनः कृत्वा न किञ्चिदपि चिन्तयेत् ॥२५॥
śanaiḥ śanair uparamed buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayāātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā na kiñchid api chintayet [25]
buddhyā–By means of the intelligence; dhṛti-gṛhītayā–controlled by the yogic practice of dhāraṇā; manaḥ ātma-saṁstham kṛtvā–completely steadying the mind within the self; śanaiḥ śanaiḥ–and gradually; uparamet–as the mind becomes tranquil; na chintayet–one should not think; kiñchit api–of anything else. [25]
25 By steadying the intelligence, one should gradually still the mind and focus it within the self alone.
यतो यतो निश्चलति मनश्चञ्चलमस्थिरम् ।ततस्ततो नियम्यैतदात्मन्येव वशं नयेत् ॥२६॥
yato yato niśchalati manaś chañchalam asthiramtatas tato niyamyaitad ātmany eva vaśaṁ nayet [26]
yataḥ yataḥ–Whatever objects; chañchalam–the fickle; asthiram–unsteady; manaḥ–mind; niśchalati–pursues; etat–this mind; niyamya–should be withdrawn; tataḥ tataḥ–from those objects; vaśam nayet–and should be subjugated; ātmani eva–within the self alone. [26]
26 The wavering and unsteady mind should be brought back from whatever mundane objects it pursues, and be held within the self alone.
प्रशान्तमनसं ह्येनं योगिनं सुखमुत्तमम् ।उपैति शान्तरजसं ब्रह्मभूतमकल्मषम् ॥२७॥
praśānta-manasaṁ hy enaṁ yoginaṁ sukham uttamamupaiti śānta-rajasaṁ brahma-bhūtam akalmaṣam [27]
uttamam sukham–The joy of self-realisation; upaiti–comes; enam yoginam hi–to such a yogī; śānta-rajasam–who is free from the action of the mode of passion; praśānta-manasam–of pacified heart; akalmaṣam–free from the defects of attachment, fear, and anger; brahma-bhūtam–and situated in the spiritual nature. [27]
27 The transcendental joy of self-realisation comes to the yogī whose passions are quieted, who is peacefulhearted, free from the defects of attachment, fear, and anger, and always situated in the spiritual nature.
युञ्जन्नेवं सदात्मानं योगी विगतकल्मषः ।सुखेन ब्रह्मसंस्पर्शमत्यन्तं सुखमश्नुते ॥२८॥
yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥsukhena brahma-saṁsparśam atyantaṁ sukham aśnute [28]
evam–In this way; sadā yuñjan–having constantly experienced by yoga; ātmānam–his own internal nature; vigata-kalmaṣaḥ–the clean-hearted; yogī–yogī; sukhena–easily; aśnute–attains; atyantam sukham–boundless, profound ecstasy; brahma-saṁsparśam–by contact with the divine; realisation of the Supersoul. [28]
28 Thus absorbed in self-realisation, the clean-hearted yogī easily attains the boundless ecstasy of contacting the divine. He realises the Supersoul. (Such yoga is of a devotional nature).
सर्व्वभूतस्थमात्मानं सर्व्वभूतानि चात्मनि ।ईक्षते योगयुक्तात्मा सर्व्वत्र समदर्शनः ॥२९॥
sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ sarva-bhūtāni chātmaniīkṣate yoga-yuktātmā sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ [29]
yoga-yukta-ātmā–The yogī who is united with Brahma, the Absolute, who realises himself as qualitatively identical with Brahma; sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ–and is a seer of the same spirituality everywhere; īkṣate–sees; ātmānam–the Supersoul; sarva-bhūta-stham–situated in all beings; cha–and; sarva-bhūtāni–all beings; (sthitaḥ)–situated; ātmani–in the Supersoul. [29]
29 His consciousness united with the Infinite, the master of yoga sees the universal spirituality. He sees the Supreme Soul within all beings, and all beings within the Supreme.
यो मां पश्यति सर्व्वत्र सर्व्वञ्च मयि पश्यति ।तस्याहं न प्रणश्यामि स च मे न प्रणश्यति ॥३०॥
yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra sarvañ cha mayi paśyatitasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi sa cha me na praṇaśyati [30]
yaḥ–For one who; paśyati–sees; mām–Me; sarvatra–everywhere, in all elements; cha–and; paśyati–sees; sarvam–everything; mayi–in Me; aham–I; na–am never; praṇaśyāmi–unseen, lost; tasya–to him; saḥ cha–and he; na–is never; praṇaśyati–unseen, lost; me–to Me—he never fails to be conscious of Me. [30]
30 For one who sees Me in everything and everything in Me, I am never lost to him, and he is never lost to Me.
सर्व्वभूतस्थितं यो मां भजत्येकत्वमास्थितः ।सर्व्वथा वर्त्तमानोऽपि स योगी मयि वर्त्तते ॥३१॥
sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥsarvathā vartamāno ’pi sa yogī mayi vartate [31]
yaḥ–That yogī who; āsthitaḥ–taking shelter; mām–in Me; ekatvam–in My nondifferent form; sarva-bhūta-sthitam–situated in the heart of every being (as the Supersoul, My four-armed form measuring one prādeś, the distance between the thumb and forefinger); bhajati (mām)–worships Me with devotion (based on hearing, chanting, and remembering); saḥ yogī–such a yogī; vartate–abides; mayi (eva)–in Me alone; varta-mānaḥ api–although present; sarvathā–in all circumstances (whether engaged in the execution of scripturally prescribed duties or not). [31]
31 The yogī who takes shelter of Me and adores Me in My non-different form as the Supersoul situated within the heart of every living being, abides in Me in all circumstances.
आत्मौपम्येन सर्व्वत्र समं पश्यति योऽर्ज्जुन ।सुखं वा यदि वा दुःखं स योगी परमो मतः ॥३२॥
ātmaupamyena sarvatra samaṁ paśyati yo ’rjunasukhaṁ vā yadi vā duḥkhaṁ sa yogī paramo mataḥ [32]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; yaḥ–one who; ātmā-aupamyena–in comparison to himself; paśyati–sees; sukham vā yadi vā duḥkham–the happiness or unhappiness; sarvatra–of all living beings; samam–equal (to his own); saḥ yogī–such a yogī; mataḥ–in My opinion; paramaḥ–is the best. [32]
32 I consider the best of all yogīs to be the one who knows the happiness and unhappiness of all beings as his own.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
योऽयं योगस्त्वया प्रोक्तः साम्येन मधुसूदन ।एतस्याहं न पश्यामि चञ्चलत्वात्स्थितिं स्थिराम् ॥३३॥
arjuna uvācha
yo ’yaṁ yogas tvayā proktaḥ sāmyena madhusūdanaetasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi chañchalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām [33]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) madhusūdana–O Madhusūdan; ayam–this; yogaḥ–yoga; yaḥ proktaḥ–that has been described; tvayā–by You; sāmyena–as equanimity: aham–I; na paśyāmi–cannot conceive; etasya–its; sthirām–stable; sthitim–state; chañchalatvāt–due to the fickle nature; (manasaḥ)–of the mind. [33]
33 Arjuna said: O Madhusūdan, because of the fickle nature of the mind, I cannot conceive how one can maintain the equilibrium in yoga that You have described.
चञ्चलं हि मनः कृष्ण प्रमाथि बलवद्दृढम् ।तस्याहं निग्रहं मन्ये वायोरिव सुदुष्करम् ॥३४॥
chañchalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa pramāthi balavad dṛḍhamtasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye vāyor iva suduṣkaram [34]
(he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; hi–for; manaḥ–the mind; chañchalam–is naturally fickle; pramāthi–turbulent—disturbing the intelligence, body, and senses; balavat–powerful—uncontrollable by even the intelligence; dṛḍham–and obstinate. (ataḥ)–Therefore; aham–I; manye–consider; nigraham–the control; tasya–of the mind; suduṣkaram–more difficult; vayoḥ iva–than (controlling) the wind. [34]
34 O Kṛṣṇa, the mind is fickle, turbulent, obstinate and very powerful. I consider controlling it to be more difficult than controlling the wind.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
असंशयं महाबाहो मनो दुर्निग्रहं चलम् ।अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय वैराग्येण च गृह्यते ॥३५॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
asaṁśayaṁ mahā-bāho mano durnigrahaṁ chalamabhyāsena tu kaunteya vairāgyeṇa cha gṛhyate [35]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) mahā-bāho–O heroic Arjuna; asaṁśayam–undoubtedly; manaḥ–the mind; chalam–is fickle; durnigraham–and extremely difficult to control; tu–but; (he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; gṛhyate–it is controlled; abhyāsena–by, under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, practice (of meditation on the Supreme Lord); cha–and; vairāgyena–by detachment. [35]
35 The Supreme Lord said: O heroic Arjuna, undoubtedly the mind is fickle and extremely difficult to control. However, O son of Kuntī, it is possible by practice and detachment.
असंयतात्मना योगो दुष्प्राप इति मे मतिः ।वश्यात्मना तु यतता शक्योऽवाप्तुमुपायतः ॥३६॥
asaṁyatātmanā yogo duṣprāpa iti me matiḥvaśyātmanā tu yatatā śakyo ’vāptum upāyataḥ [36]
yogaḥ–Yoga; duṣprāpaḥ–is difficult to attain; asaṁyata-ātmanā–by a person of uncontrolled mind; iti–this is; me–My; matiḥ–opinion; tu–but; yatatā–one who strives; vaśya-ātmanā–to control the mind; upāyataḥ–by the appropriate method of arduous practice (sādhana); avāptum śakyaḥ–can attain to yoga. [36]
36 I consider that yoga is difficult to attain for the person of unrestrained mind. But one who strives to restrain the mind by the appropriate practice can succeed in yoga.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
अयतिः श्रद्धयोपेतो योगाच्चलितमानसः ।अप्राप्य योगसंसिद्धिं कां गतिं कृष्ण गच्छति ॥३७॥
arjuna uvācha
ayatiḥ śraddhayopeto yogāch chalita-mānasaḥaprāpya yoga-saṁsiddhiṁ kāṁ gatiṁ kṛṣṇa gachchhati [37]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; kām gatim gachchhati–what is the fate of; śraddhayā upetaḥ–a person who engages in yoga practice due to his faith in yoga scriptures; ayatiḥ–yet is not diligent; yogāt chalita-mānasaḥ–and whose mind deviates from yoga (due to a lack of practice and abnegation); aprāpya–without achieving; yoga-saṁsiddhim–success in yoga? [37]
37 Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, what is the destination of a person who, due to his faith in the scriptures, engages in yoga practice, but lacking perseverence, proper practice, and abnegation, is distracted by mundane inclinations and fails to succeed in yoga practice?
कच्चिन्नोभयविभ्रष्टश्छिन्नाभ्रमिव नश्यति ।अप्रतिष्ठो महाबाहो विमूढो ब्रह्मणः पथि ॥३८॥
kachchin nobhaya-vibhraṣṭaś chhinnābhram iva naśyatiapratiṣṭho mahā-bāho vimūḍho brahmaṇaḥ pathi [38]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty hero; kachchit na–is it not that; (saḥ)–such a person; vimūḍhaḥ–bewildered; brahmaṇaḥ pathi–on the path of attaining the Absolute; apratiṣṭhaḥ–shelterless; ubhaya-vibhraṣṭaḥ–and deviated from the paths of both karma and yoga; naśyati–is lost; iva–like; chhinna-abhram–a scattered cloud? [38]
38 O mighty hero, O Kṛṣṇa, having deviated from the yoga of attaining the Absolute, shelterless and fallen from the paths of both action and meditation, is not such a person utterly lost, like a scattered cloud?
एतन्मे संशयं कृष्ण छेत्तुमर्हस्यशेषतः ।त्वदन्यः संशयस्यास्य छेत्ता न ह्युपपद्यते ॥३९॥
etan me saṁśayaṁ kṛṣṇa chhettum arhasy aśeṣataḥtvad-anyaḥ saṁśayasyāsya chhettā na hy upapadyate [39]
(he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; (tvam)–You; arhasi–are able; aśeṣataḥ chhettum–to completely slash; etat saṁśayam–this doubt; me–of mine. tvat anyaḥ–Other than You; chhettā–a destroyer; asya saṁśayasya–of this doubt; na hi upapadyate–is not to be found. [39]
39 O Kṛṣṇa! No one but You can dispel this doubt of mine. Please mercifully slash it at the root.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
पार्थ नैवेह नामुत्र विनाशस्तस्य विद्यते ।न हि कल्याणकृत्कश्चिद्दुर्गतिं तात गच्छति ॥४०॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
pārtha naiveha nāmutra vināśas tasya vidyatena hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaśchid durgatiṁ tāta gachchhati [40]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; na vidyate–there is no; tasya vināśaḥ–loss for him, he is not denied the happiness of the heavenly plane; iha eva–in this world; na (vidyate)–and there is no; (tasya vināśaḥ)–loss for him, he is not denied the chance of the fortune to see the Supersoul; amutra–in the next life, i.e. in the supramundane plane; hi–since; (he) tata–O dear one; kaśchit–any; kalyāṇa-kṛt–person engaged in virtuous actions; na gachchhati durgatim–does not suffer an ill fate. [40]
40 The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, son of Kuntī, there is no loss for the unsuccessful yoga practitioner as he is not denied the happiness of the heavenly plane in this world, nor is he denied the chance of the fortune to see the Supersoul in the transcendental realm. This is so, O dear one, because a person who performs virtuous actions never suffers an ill fate.
प्राप्य पुण्यकृतां लोकानुषित्वा शाश्वतीः समाः ।शुचीनां श्रीमतां गेहे योगभ्रष्टोऽभिजायते ॥४१॥
prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥśuchīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate [41]
prāpya–Attaining to; lokān–the planes; puṇya-kṛtam–of the pious; yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ–the person fallen from (comparatively short) yoga practice; uṣitvā–residing; (tatra)–there; śāśvatīḥ samāḥ–for many years; abhijāyate–takes birth; gehe–in the home; śrīmatām–of noble, prosperous persons; śuchīnām–given to pure and honest practices. [41]
41 After residing for many years in all those heavenly planes that are attainable by the performers of great sacrifices such as the Aśvamedha, the unsuccessful yoga practitioner takes birth in the home of honourable, prosperous persons given to pure and honest practices.
अथवा योगिनामेव कुले भवति धीमताम् ।एतद्धि दुर्लभतरं लोके जन्म यदीदृशम् ॥४२॥
athavā yoginām eva kule bhavati dhīmatāmetaddhi durlabhataraṁ loke janma yad īdṛśam [42]
athavā eva–Otherwise (after relatively longer yoga practice); bhavati–he is born; kule–in a lineage; dhīmatām–of teachers of yoga; yoginām–dedicated to yoga practice. hi–Certainly; yat īdṛśam–such; janma–a birth; etat–as this; durlabhataram–is more rarely attained; loke–in this world. [42]
42 Or he takes birth in the home or family of teachers of yoga, who are dedicated to yoga practice. Such a birth is more rarely attained in this world.
तत्र तं बुद्धिसंयोगं लभते पौर्व्वदैहिकम् ।यतते च ततो भूयः संसिद्धौ कुरुनन्दन ॥४३॥
tatra taṁ buddhi-saṁyogaṁ labhate paurva-daihikamyatate cha tato bhūyaḥ saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana [43]
(he) kuru-nandana–O Arjuna, son of Kuru; tatra–in one of these situations; (saḥ)–he; labhate–attains; tam buddhi-saṁyogam–that consciousness of the Supersoul; paurva-daihikam–of his previous life. tataḥ cha–Thereby; yatate–he strives; bhūyaḥ–again; saṁsiddhau–for spiritual success—to attain the darśan or transcendental vision of the Supersoul. [43]
43 O son of Kuru, within one of these situations, the wisdom he had attained in his previous life is revived, and he again strives for success.
पूर्व्वाभ्यासेन तेनैव ह्रियते ह्यवशोऽपि सः ।जिज्ञासुरपि योगस्य शब्दब्रह्मातिवर्त्तते ॥४४॥
pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥjijñāsur api yogasya śabda-brahmātivartate [44]
hi–Since; avaśaḥ api–despite himself; saḥ eva–he; hriyate–is carried; tena pūrva-abhyāsena–by his practice of the previous life. jijñāsuḥ api–As a seeker; yogasya–of yoga; ativartate–he surpasses; śabda-brahma–(the fruitive rituals of) the Vedas. [44]
44 Despite himself, he is carried by the yoga practice of his previous life. In his search, he surpasses the fruitive rituals of the Vedas.
प्रयत्नाद्यतमानस्तु योगी संशुद्धकिल्बिषः ।अनेकजन्मसंसिद्धस्ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥४५॥
prayatnād yatamānas tu yogī saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥaneka-janma-saṁsiddhas tato yāti parāṁ gatim [45]
yogī tu–The yogī; yatamānaḥ–striving harder; prayatnāt–than the previous attempt; saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ–his consciousness cleansed of all worldly attachment; aneka-janma-saṁsiddhaḥ–gains the perfection of many lifetimes’ endeavours; tataḥ–and thereby; yāti–gains; parām gatim–liberation in the form of both self-realisation and Supersoul-realisation. [45]
45 Striving harder than before, the yogī’s consciousness is cleansed of all worldly attachment, and he achieves the fruit of many lifetimes of yoga practice—he attains the supreme destination.
तपस्विभ्योऽधिको योगी ज्ञानिभ्योऽपि मतोऽधिकः ।कर्म्मिभ्यश्चाधिको योगी तस्माद्योगी भवार्ज्जुन ॥४६॥
tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogī jñānibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikaḥkarmibhyaś chādhiko yogī tasmād yogī bhavārjuna [46]
yogī–The yogī; adhikaḥ–is superior; tapasvibhyaḥ–to the performer of severe austerities (such as Chāndrāyaṇ); adhikaḥ api–and is also superior; jñānibhyaḥ–to the jñānī, the person of knowledge. yogī–The yogī; adhikaḥ cha–is also superior; karmibhyaḥ–to the karmī, person of action; (iti me)–this is My; mataḥ–consideration. tasmāt–Therefore; (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; (tvam)–you; bhava–be; yogī–a yogī. [46]
46 The yogī is superior to persons engaged in severe austerities (such as the Chāndrāyaṇ vow), superior to the person of knowledge who worships Brahma, and superior to the person of action. Know this to be My conclusion. Therefore, O Arjuna, be a yogī.
योगिनामपि सर्व्वेषां मद्गतेनान्तरात्मना ।श्रद्धावान्भजते यो मां स मे युक्ततमो मतः ॥४७॥
yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanāśraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ [47]
sarveṣām yoginām api–Of all types of yogīs on the paths of karma, jñān, tapasyā, aṣṭāṅga-yoga, bhakti, etc.; yaḥ–one who; śraddhāvān–with firm faith in the holy scriptures which corroborate the superexcellence of devotion for Me; antaḥ-ātmanā–and with heart; mat-gatena–fully dedicated to Me; bhajate mām–renders service to Me by engaging in the devotional practices based on hearing and chanting My glories; saḥ–such a devotee; yuktatamaḥ–is foremost. (iti)–This is; me–My; mataḥ–opinion. [47]
47 The best of all yogīs is the devotee who has full faith in the authoritative pure devotional scriptures, and who adores Me with all his heart, hearing and singing My divine glories, rendering all services unto Me. This is My opinion.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे ध्यानयोगो नाम षष्ठोऽध्यायः ॥६॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvādedhyāna-yogo nāma ṣaṣṭho ’dhyāyaḥ [6]
End of Chapter SixThe Path of Meditationfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
सप्तमोऽध्यायः
Chapter Seven Jñāna-vijñāna-yoga Knowledge and Realisation of the Supreme
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
मय्यासक्तमनाः पार्थ योगं युञ्जन्मदाश्रयः ।असंशयं समग्रं मां यथा ज्ञास्यसि तच्छृणु ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥasaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ yathā jñāsyasi tach chhṛṇu [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) pārtha–O Arjuna; śṛṇu tat–hear; yathā–how; āsakta-manāḥ–with mind attached; mayi–to Me, the Supreme Lord; yuñjan yogam–linking your consciousness with Me; mat-āśrayaḥ–taking refuge in Me alone (without any attempts of karma, etc.); asaṁśayam–without doubt; jñāsyasi–you will be able to know; mām–Me; samagram–in full—along with My abode, My opulences, and My associates. [1]
1 The Lord said: O Pārtha, hear from Me how, with mind attached to Me, the Supreme Lord, linking your consciousness with Me and taking refuge in Me alone, you will without doubt be able to know Me, My holy abode, My opulences, and My associates.
ज्ञानं तेऽहं सविज्ञानमिदं वक्ष्याम्यशेषतः ।यज्ज्ञात्वा नेह भूयोऽन्यज्ज्ञातव्यमवशिष्यते ॥२॥
jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥyaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj jñātavyam avaśiṣyate [2]
aham–I; vakṣyāmi–shall now describe; aśeṣataḥ–completely; te–to you; idam jñānam–this knowledge of My absolute power (aiśvaryamaya-jñān); sa-vijñānam–with the knowledge to be realised of My sweetness (mādhurya-anubhav); jñātvā–knowing; yat–which; bhūyaḥ–again; anyat–any other; (tava) jñātavyam–thing to be known by you; na avaśiṣyate–will not remain; iha–on this supreme path. [2]
2 Now I shall reveal to you this knowledge of My absolute power as well as the realisation of My sweetness, knowing which, nothing will remain to be known, here on this supreme path.
मनुष्याणां सहस्रेषु कश्चिद्यतति सिद्धये ।यततामपि सिद्धानां कश्चिन्मां वेत्ति तत्त्वतः ॥३॥
manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaśchid yatati siddhayeyatatām api siddhānāṁ kaśchin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ [3]
manuṣyāṇām sahasreṣu–Of thousands of men; kaśchit–a rare one; yatati–endeavours; siddhaye–for self-realisation and Supersoul-realisation; yatatām siddhānām api–and of thousands who have attained such realisation; kaśchit–a rare one; tattvataḥ–truly; vetti–knows; mām–Me, Śyāmasundar. [3]
3 Of countless souls, few reach the human form; of thousands of human beings, very few may try to realise the soul and the Supersoul; and of thousands who have attained such realisation, hardly one can actually know Me, Śyāmasundar.
भूमिरापोऽनलो वायुः खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च ।अहङ्कार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा ॥४॥
bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva chaahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā [4]
bhūmiḥ–Earth; āpaḥ–water; analaḥ–fire; vāyuḥ–air; kham–ether; manaḥ–mind; buddhiḥ–intelligence; ahaṅkāraḥ eva cha–and ego; iti–thus; iyam–this; prakṛtiḥ–nature, māyā-śakti, illusory potency; me–of Mine; bhinnā–is divided; aṣṭa-dhā–eightfold. [4]
4 Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and ego are the eight divisions of My illusory potency in this world.
Commentary
In this verse, it is expressed that jñān, or knowledge, in the true sense of the word and in accordance with the precepts of devotion, is actually Bhagavad-aiśvarya-jñān, or knowledge of the supremacy of the Lord. The general seekers of knowledge may consider realisation of the soul—as distinct from the body and material elements—to be enlightenment, but this does not constitute ultimate knowledge.
Thus, to explain the conception of His Lordship, the Lord reveals His forms, His potencies, and their characteristics: “My different aspects are Brahma, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. Brahma is a non-differentiated, formless aspect of My potency. Paramātmā, the Supersoul, is also an appearance of My potency (in relation to the cosmic manifestation), and this aspect of Mine is not eternally manifest. Only My form of Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord, is My eternal Self, and in this form My three eternal potencies exist as antaraṅgā- or chit-śhakti—the internal, divine potency; bahiraṅgā- or māyā-śakti—the external, illusory potency; and taṭasthā- or jīva-śakti—the marginal potency comprising the innumerable living beings.”
In this verse, the Lord has described His external, illusory potency.
—Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur
अपरेयमितस्त्वन्यां प्रकृतिं  विद्धि मे पराम् ।जीवभूतां महाबाहो ययेदं धार्य्यते जगत् ॥५॥
apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parāmjīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [5]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty hero; iyam–this external nature, external potency; aparā–is inferior; tu–but; parām–superior; itaḥ–to this; viddhi–you should know; anyām–another; prakṛtim–nature, the marginal potency; me–of Mine; jīva-bhūtām–in the form of the individual souls; yayā–the conscious potency by which; idam jagat–this world; dhāryate–is adopted for enjoyment through fruitive actions. [5]
5 O mighty hero, Arjuna, this external, worldly nature is inferior. But know that superior to this nature is My marginal potency, comprised of the individual souls. Worldly existence is adopted by the souls for enjoyment through fruitive actions. (The divine world emanates from My internal potency and the mundane world from My external potency. The potency of the living beings is known as marginal as they are constitutionally situated midway between these planes. They may choose to reside either in the mundane plane or the divine.)
एतद्योनीनि भूतानि सर्व्वाणीत्युपधारय ।अहं कृत्स्नस्य जगतः प्रभवः प्रलयस्तथा ॥६॥
etad yonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇīty upadhārayaahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā [6]
upadhāraya–Understand; iti–that; sarvāṇi bhūtāni–all living species, moving and stationary; etat yonīni–are manifest from these two types of prakṛti, or natures, as kṣetra and kṣetrajña (vide 13.12). aham prabhavaḥ–I am the source of manifestation; tathā pralayaḥ–and dissolution; kṛtsnasya–of the entire; jagataḥ–universe. [6]
6 Know that all species, either moving or stationary, are manifest from these two natures as the field of action and the knower of the field; and I alone am the cause of the manifestation and dissolution of the entire universe.
मत्तः परतरं नान्यत्किञ्चिदस्ति धनञ्जय ।मयि सर्व्वमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव ॥७॥
mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñchid asti dhanañjayamayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva [7]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Dhanañjaya, conqueror of riches; na anyat kiñchit–nothing else; asti–is; parataram–superior; mattaḥ–to Me. idam sarvam–This whole world; protam–is threaded; mayi–in Me; iva–like; maṇi-gaṇāḥ–gems; sūtre–strung on a thread. [7]
7 O Arjuna, there is nothing superior to Me. All existence depends on Me, like gems strung on a thread.
रसोऽहमप्सु कौन्तेय प्रभास्मि शशिसूर्य्ययोः ।प्रणवः सर्व्ववेदेषु शब्दः खे पौरुषं नृषु ॥८॥
raso ’ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥpraṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu [8]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; aham asmi–I am present; rasaḥ–by My power as the essential taste; apsu–of water. (aham asmi)–I am present; prabhā–by My power of radiance; śaśi-sūryayoḥ–in the moon and sun. (aham asmi)–I am present; sarva-vedeṣu–in all the Vedas; praṇavaḥ–as the origin of the Vedas, Oṁkār. (aham asmi)–I am present; śabdaḥ–as the element of sound; khe–in the ether. (aham asmi)–I am present; pauruṣaṁ–as masculinity; nṛṣu–in men. [8]
8 O son of Kuntī, I am the taste of water, I am the radiance of the sun and the moon. I am Om, the fundamental vibration in all the Vedas, I am the sound in the ether, and I am the masculinity in men.
पुण्यो गन्धः पृथिव्याञ्च तेजश्चास्मि विभावसौ ।जीवनं सर्व्वभूतेषु तपश्चास्मि तपस्विषु ॥९॥
puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāñ cha tejaś chāsmi vibhāvasaujīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu tapaś chāsmi tapasviṣu [9]
(aham)–I; asmi–am present; puṇyaḥ gandhaḥ–as the unmixed fragrance; pṛthivyām cha–in the earth; tejaḥ vibhāvasau cha–and as the force of radiance and heat in fire; asmi–(I) am present; jīvanam–as the life-span; sarva-bhūteṣu–of all beings; cha–and; tapaḥ–the power to endure duality, etc.; tapasviṣu–in the performers of austerities. [9]
9 I am the pure fragrance of the earth, and I am the radiance of fire. I am the life-span of all beings, and in ascetics, I am the power to endure duality such as cold and heat.
बीजं मां सर्व्वभूतानां विद्धि पार्थ सनातनम् ।बुद्धिर्बुद्धिमतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् ॥१०॥
bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ viddhi pārtha sanātanambuddhir buddhimatām asmi tejas tejasvinām aham [10]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; viddhi–know; mām–Me; sanātanam bījam–as the eternal cause, known as pradhān; sarva-bhūtānām–of all life-forms. aham asmi–I am present; buddhiḥ–as the intelligence; buddhi-matām–of the intelligent; tejaḥ–and as the prowess; tejasvinām–of the bold. [10]
10 O Pārtha, know Me as the eternal, original cause of all life-forms. I am the intelligence of the intelligent, the power of the powerful.
बलं बलवतां चाहं कामरागविवर्ज्जितम् ।धर्म्माविरुद्धो भूतेषु कामोऽस्मि भरतर्षभ ॥११॥
balaṁ balavatāṁ chāhaṁ kāma-rāga-vivarjitamdharmāviruddho bhūteṣu kāmo ’smi bharatarṣabha [11]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O best of the dynasty of Bharat; aham asmi–I am present; bala-vatām–for the strong; balam–as strength of sāttvika quality, or goodness, which enables one to execute his religious duties; kāma-rāga-vivarjitam–without selfishness and attachment; cha–and; (aham asmi)–I am present; bhūteṣu–in the living beings; kāmaḥ–as the desire to procreate; dharma-aviruddhaḥ–without crossing the universal principles of religion, i.e. to beget offspring only in one’s wife. [11]
11 O Arjuna, I am the strength of the strong, without selfishness and attachment; and I am the desire for procreation in the living beings which does not contravene the universal principles of religion.
ये चैव सात्त्विका भावा राजसास्तामसाश्च ये ।मत्त एवेति तान्विद्धि न त्वहं तेषु ते मयि ॥१२॥
ye chaiva sāttvikā bhāvā rājasās tāmasāś cha yematta eveti tān viddhi na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi [12]
ye ye bhāvāḥ eva–Whatever exists; sāttvikāḥ–of the nature of goodness; rājasāḥ cha–and of the nature of passion; tāmasāḥ cha–and of the nature of ignorance; viddhi–know; tān (sarvān)–all these; iti–as; mattaḥ eva–manifest from Me alone. aham na (varte)–I do not reside; teṣu–within them; tu–but; te (vartante) mayi–they are in Me. [12]
12 Furthermore, know that all things, of the nature of goodness, passion, and ignorance, are manifest from Me alone. Nevertheless, I am not in them. They, subordinate to Me, are in Me.
त्रिभिर्गुणमयैर्भावैरेभिः सर्व्वमिदं जगत् ।मोहितं नाभिजानाति मामेभ्यः परमव्ययम् ॥१३॥
tribhir guṇamayair bhāvair ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagatmohitaṁ nābhijānāti mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam [13]
idam–This; sarvam–whole; jagat–living world; mohitam–is deluded; ebhiḥ bhāvaiḥ tribhiḥ guṇamayaiḥ–by this manifestation of the three modes of material nature. (ataḥ)–Therefore; na abhijānāti–no one knows; mām–Me, Kṛṣṇa; ebhyaḥ param–who am transcendental to these modes; avyayam–and immutable. [13]
13 The entire world of living beings is deluded by the three modes of material nature. Therefore, no one can know Me, the Supreme Lord, who am transcendental to these modes and immutable.
दैवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया ।मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तरन्ति ते ॥१४॥
daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayāmām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [14]
eṣā–This; daivī–supramundane (alluring); māyā–external potency; mama–of Mine; guṇa-mayī–composed of the three modes of material nature; hi–certainly; duratyayā–is difficult to cross. (tathāpi)–However; ye–those who; prapadyante–take shelter; mām eva–in Me alone; te–they; taranti–are able to cross; etām–this almost insurmountable; māyām–māyā, illusion. [14]
14 My alluring, ‘trimodal’, illusory potency is practically insurmountable. However, those who take shelter in Me can overcome this powerful obstacle.
न मां दुष्कृतिनो मूढाःप्रपद्यन्ते नराधमाः ।माययापहृतज्ञाना आसुरं भावमाश्रिताः ॥१५॥
na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥmāyayāpahṛta-jñānā āsuraṁ-bhāvam-āśritāḥ [15]
duṣkṛtinaḥ–These four kinds of wrongdoers or unfortunate persons; na prapadyante–do not surrender; mām–to Me; mūdhāḥ–(1) the karmīs, or fruitive workers; nara-adhamāḥ–(2) fallen persons, or those who take the path of devotion but later reject it, considering it inadequate or worthless; apahṛta-jñānāḥ–(3) those whose knowledge is covered; māyayā–by māyā, illusion (despite their study of the scriptures, they consider that only the form of Lord Nārāyaṇ is worshippable, and that Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Rāma, and other factual forms of the Supreme are merely mortal); āsuram-bhāvam-āśritāḥ–and (4) the demoniac (māyāvādīs, the impersonalists, who dismember My form by their arrows of false logic, resembling demons like Jarāsandha). [15]
15 These four kinds of wrongdoers do not surrender unto Me: fruitive workers, comparable to animals; fallen persons who take the highest path, devotion, but later reject it, considering it inadequate or worthless; those whose knowledge covered by illusion, Māyā (despite their scriptural study, they consider that only the form of Lord Nārāyaṇ is worshippable, and they think that Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Rāma and other factual forms are merely mortal); and the demoniac (impersonalists who dismember My form by their arrows of false logic, resembling demons like Jarāsandha).
चतुर्विधा भजन्ते मां जनाः सुकृतिनोऽर्ज्जुन ।आर्त्तो जिज्ञासुरर्थार्थी ज्ञानी च भरतर्षभ ॥१६॥
chatur-vidhā bhajante māṁ janāḥ sukṛtino ’rjunaārto jijñāsur arthārthī jñānī cha bharatarṣbha [16]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O great scion of Bharat; (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; ārtaḥ–one suffering from disease or other afflictions; jijñāsuḥ–one seeking scriptural knowledge or knowledge of the soul; artha-arthī–one desiring earthly or heavenly happiness; cha and; jñānī–the purified knower of the soul; (iti) chatuḥ-vidhāḥ janāḥ–these four kinds of persons; sukṛtinaḥ (santaḥ)–being fortunate—influenced by devotion for Me; bhajante mām–worship Me (though their motives may be mixed with action or knowledge). [16]
16 O Arjuna, best of the Bhāratas, four kinds of persons have the fortune to worship Me: the afflicted, the seeker of knowledge, the seeker of happiness, and the self-realised.
तेषां ज्ञानी नित्ययुक्त एकभक्तिर्विशिष्यते ।प्रियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थमहं स च मम प्रियः ॥१७॥
teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir viśiṣyatepriyo hi jñānino ’ty-artham ahaṁ sa cha mama priyaḥ [17]
teṣām–Among them; jñānī–the self-realised person; eka-bhaktiḥ–My pure devotee; nityaḥ-yuktaḥ–whose consciousness is completely absorbed in Me; viśiṣyate–is the best. hi–For; aham–I, Śyāmasundar; ati-artham–am very; priyaḥ–dear; jñāninaḥ–to that enlightened soul; saḥ cha priyaḥ–and he, too, is dear; mama–to Me. [17]
17 Of these four types of devotees, best is the self-realised person who is My pure devotee, and whose consciousnesss is fully absorbed in Me. For I, Śyāmasundar, am very dear to him, and he is dear to Me.
उदाराः सर्व्व एवैते ज्ञानी त्वात्मैव मे मतम् ।आस्थितः स हि युक्तात्मा मामेवानुत्तमां गतिम् ॥१८॥
udārāḥ sarva evaite jñānī tv ātmaiva me matamāsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā mām evānuttamāṁ gatim [18]
eva–Certainly; sarve–all; ete–these persons are; udārāḥ–noble, unselfish souls dear to Me; tu–but; jñānī–the spiritually self-realised soul; ātmā eva–is as dear to Me as My own self. (iti)–This is; me–My; matam–opinion; hi–since; yukta-ātmā eva (san)–having fully dedicated his heart unto Me; saḥ–that jñānī; eva āsthitaḥ–has fully determined; mām–Me, Śyāmasundar; anuttamām–as the supreme; gatim–goal.[18]
18 Certainly they are all noble souls, dear to Me, yet the spiritually self-realised soul is as beloved to Me as My own self, for he has given his heart to Me as his only shelter and ultimate goal of life.
बहूनां जन्मनामन्ते ज्ञानवान्मां प्रपद्यते ।वासुदेवः सर्व्वमिति स महात्मा सुदुर्लभः ॥१९॥
bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyatevāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [19]
ante–After; bahūnām–many; janmanām–births; jñānavān–the enlightened person (by the fortune of sādhu-saṅga, devotional association); iti–thus realising; sarvam–everything, the entire world of moving and stationary beings; vāsudevaḥ–is of the nature of Vāsudev, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prapadyate–he surrenders; mām–unto Me. saḥ–Such; mahātmā–a great soul; su-durlabhaḥ–is very rare. [19]
19 After many births, the enlightened soul (blessed with devotional association) realises that everything is of the nature of (subordinate to) Vāsudev, and thus he surrenders unto Me. Such a great soul is very rare.
कामैस्तैस्तैर्हृतज्ञानाः प्रपद्यन्तेऽन्यदेवताः ।तं तं नियममास्थाय प्रकृत्या नियताः स्वया ॥२०॥
kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ prapadyante ’nya-devatāḥtaṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā [20]
hṛta-jñānāḥ–Persons whose intelligence is misled; taiḥ taiḥ kāmaiḥ–by particular worldly desires based on likes and dislikes; niyatāḥ (santaḥ)–being governed; svayā prakṛtyā–by their own natures; prapadyante–worship; anya-devatāḥ–other godly personalities—the demigods—the sun-god, etc.; āsthāya–after adopting; tam tam–the corresponding; niyamam–rituals of fasting, etc. [20]
20 Persons misled by worldly desires, being governed by their own natures, worship other godly personalities like the sun-god and the many demigods, adopting the corresponding rituals to attain their objectives.
यो यो यां यां तनुं भक्तः श्रद्धयार्च्चितुमिच्छति ।तस्य तस्याचलां श्रद्धां तामेव विदधाम्यहम् ॥२१॥
yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ śraddhayārchitum ichchhatitasya tasyāchalāṁ śraddhāṁ tām eva vidadhāmy aham [21]
yām yām–According to whichever; tanum–demigod, representing a form of Me; yaḥ yaḥ–a particular; bhaktaḥ–devotee; ichchhati–desires; architum śraddhayā–to worship with faith; aham–I, as the Supersoul dwelling within his heart; eva–certainly; vidadhāmi–ordain; achalām–firm; śraddhām–faith; tasya tasya–in that particular devotee; tām–for that form. [21]
21 According to a person’s desire, as his faith grows to worship a particular demigod, I, as the Supersoul in his heart, make his faith strong in that demigod (representing a form of Me).
स तया श्रद्धया युक्तस्तस्याराधनमीहते ।लभते च ततः कामान्मयैव विहितान्हि तान् ॥२२॥
sa tayā śraddhayā yuktas tasyārādhanam īhatelabhate cha tataḥ kāmān mayaiva vihitān hi tān [22]
yuktaḥ (san)–Being linked; tayā śraddhayā–with that firm faith; saḥ–that devotee; īhate–performs; ārādhanam–worship; tasyāḥ–of that demigod’s deity; cha–and; hi– actually; vihitān–arranged; mayā eva–by Me alone, as the Supersoul of the demigod; labhate–(the devotee) attains; tān kāmān–his desired results; tataḥ–from that deity. [22]
22 His faith nourished by Me, such a devotee continues worshipping the deity of that demigod and attains all his desired objects from that deity. Again, this happens by My sanction alone, since I am the Supersoul, situated within the heart of the demigod, too.
अन्तवत्तु फलं तेषां तद्भवत्यल्पमेधसाम् ।देवान्देवयजो यान्ति मद्भक्ता यान्ति मामपि ॥२३॥
antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasāmdevān deva-yajo yānti mad-bhaktā yānti mām api [23]
tu–But; tat phalam–that fruit; teṣām alpa-medhasām–of those unwise worshippers of the demigods; bhavati–is; antavat–temporary. deva-yajaḥ–The worshippers of the demigods; yānti–reach; devān–the respective demigods; mat-bhaktāḥ api–and My devotees; yānti–reach; māṁ–Me. [23]
23 But the fruit obtained by those unwise worshippers of the demigods is temporary. They reach the gods they worship, but My devotees come to Me.
अव्यक्तं व्यक्तिमापन्नं मन्यन्ते मामबुद्धयः ।परं भावमजानन्तो ममाव्ययमनुत्तमम् ॥२४॥
avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ manyante mām abuddhayaḥparaṁ bhāvam ajānanto mamāvyayam anuttamam [24]
ajānantaḥ–Not knowing; mama–My; avyayam–eternal; anuttamam–superexcellent; param–transcendental; bhāvam–nature–form, birth, qualities, activities, and Pastimes, etc.; abuddhayaḥ–unwise persons; manyante–think; mām–of Me; avyaktam–as the impersonal or formless Brahma; āpannam–which has accepted; vyaktim–birth in Vasudev’s cell as an ordinary human being. [24]
24 My eternal superexcellent nature—My form, qualities, activities, and Pastimes—are all transcendental, but unwise persons cannot know the truth, and they think, “The formless Brahma took birth in Vasudev’s cell as an ordinary human being.”
नाहं प्रकाशः सर्व्वस्य योगमायासमावृतः ।मूढोऽयं नाभिजानाति लोको मामजमव्ययम् ॥२५॥
nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥmūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti loko mām ajam avyayam [25]
aham–I; na (bhavāmi)–am not; prakāśaḥ–manifest; sarvasya–to all; yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ–being concealed by My yogamāyā potency; (ataḥ)–therefore; ayam–these; mūḍhaḥ lokaḥ–foolish persons; na abhijānāti–cannot know; mām–Me, Śyāmasundar, the son of Vasudev; ajam–birthless; avyayam–and immutable. [25]
25 By My sweet will, remaining concealed by My own potency, I am not manifest to anyone and everyone. So the foolish cannot know Me, the son of Vasudev, unborn and ever-existent in My divine Śyāmasundar form of beautiful feature like a blackish rain-cloud.
वेदाहं समतीतानि वर्त्तमानानि चार्ज्जुन ।भविष्याणि च भूतानि मां तु वेद न कश्चन ॥२६॥
vedāhaṁ samatītāni vartamānāni chārjunabhaviṣyāṇi cha bhūtāni māṁ tu veda na kaśchana [26]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; aham–I; veda–know; samatītāni–all past; vartamānāni–present; bhaviṣyāṇi cha–and future; bhūtāni–mobile and immobile beings; tu–but; kaśchana–anyone (either in this world or beyond it); na cha veda–cannot know; mām–Me (due to their knowledge being covered by māyā and yogamāyā, My external illusory potency and the internal potency of My will). [26]
26 O Arjuna, I know all living beings of the past, present and future, but no one can know Me in truth.
इच्छाद्वेषसमुत्थेन द्वन्द्वमोहेन भारत ।सर्व्वभूतानि सम्मोहं सर्गे यान्ति परन्तप ॥२७॥
ichchhā-dveṣa-samutthena dvandva-mohena bhāratasarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ sarge yānti parantapa [27]
(he) bhārata (he) parantapa–O Arjuna, chastiser of the enemy; sarge–at the manifestation of the universe; sarva-bhūtāni–all beings; yānti–become; sammoham–deluded; dvandva-mohena–by the illusion of duality; ichchhā-dveṣa-samutthena–arising from likes and dislikes. [27]
27 O Arjuna, chastiser of the enemy, at the manifestation of the universe, all beings become deluded by duality based on likes and dislikes.
येषां त्वन्तगतं पापं जनानां पुण्यकर्म्मणाम् ।ते द्वन्द्वमोहनिर्म्मुक्ता भजन्ते मां दृढव्रताः ॥२८॥
yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇāmte dvandva-moha-nirmuktā bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ [28]
tu–But; janānām–persons; puṇya-karmaṇām–who are performers of virtuous deeds; yeṣām–whose; pāpam–sins; anta-gatam–have been eradicated (by the fortune of association with My pure devotee); te–all such persons; dvandva-moha-nirmuktāḥ–free from the illusion of duality; dṛḍha-vratāḥ–and fixed in consciousness of Me; bhajante–worship, serve; mām–Me. [28]
28 But the performers of virtuous deeds are purified of all sin (by the fortune of association with My pure devotee). Thus freed from the illusion of duality, they worship Me with firm resolve.
जरामरणमोक्षाय मामाश्रित्य यतन्ति ये ।ते ब्रह्म तद्विदुः कृत्स्नमध्यात्मं कर्म्म चाखिलम् ॥२९॥
jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya mām āśritya yatanti yete brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam adhyātmaṁ karma chākhilam [29]
ye–Those who; yatanti–strive; jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya–for freedom from disease and death; āśritya–taking shelter, placing their trust and devotion; mām–in Me; te–they; viduḥ–know; tat brahma–that Brahma; adhyātmam–the individual soul; kṛtsnam–in full; cha–and; akhilam–all; karma–the action by which the souls are bound to worldly existence. [29]
29 Those who strive for freedom from the world of disease and death, placing their trust and devotion in Me—they know Brahma, they know the soul, and they know karma, the action that binds the soul again and again to this mundane plane of suffering.
साधिभूताधिदैवं मां साधियज्ञञ्च ये विदुः ।प्रयाणकालेऽपि च मां ते विदुर्युक्तचेतसः ॥३०॥
sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ sādhiyajñañ cha ye viduḥprayāṇa-kāle ’pi cha māṁ te vidur yukta-chetasaḥ [30]
cha–And; ye–those who; viduḥ–know; mām–Me; sa-adhibhūta-adhidaivam–in relation to the worldly plane and to the celestial plane; sa-adhiyajñam cha–and in relation to sacrifice; te–those persons; yukta-chetasaḥ–of consciousness absorbed in Me; viduḥ–know; mām–Me; prayāṇa-kāle api–even at the time of death. [30]
30 And those who know Me in relation to the worldly plane, the celestial plane, and the plane of sacrifice—such persons, their consciousness absorbed in Me, know Me even at the time of death. (Afflicted in the face of fearful death, they do not forget Me.)
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रेश्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे ज्ञानविज्ञानयोगो नाम सप्तमोऽध्यायः ॥७॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde jñāna-vijñāna-yogo nāma saptamo ’dhyāyaḥ [7]
End of Chapter SevenKnowledge and Realisation of the Supremefrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
अष्टमोऽध्यायः
Chapter Eight Tāraka-brahma-yoga The Merciful Absolute
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
किं तद्ब्रह्म किमध्यात्मं किं कर्म्म पुरुषोत्तम ।अधिभूतञ्च किं प्रोक्तमधिदैवं किमुच्यते ॥१॥
अधियज्ञः कथं कोऽत्र देहेऽस्मिन्मधुसूदन ।प्रयाणकाले च कथं ज्ञेयोऽसि नियतात्मभिः ॥२॥
arjuna uvācha
kiṁ tad-brahma kim adhyātmaṁ kiṁ karma puruṣottamaadhibhūtañ cha kiṁ proktam adhidaivaṁ kim uchyate [1]
adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra dehe ’smin madhusūdanaprayāṇa-kāle cha kathaṁ jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ [2]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) puruṣottama–O Puruṣottam, Supreme Person; kim–what is; tat–that; brahma–Brahma? adhyātmam kim–What is adhyātma, the soul? karma kim–What is karma, action? cha–And; kim proktam–what is; adhibhūtam–adhibhūta, the worldly plane? kim (cha) uchyate–and what is; adhidaivam–adhidaiva, the celestial plane? (he) madhusūdana–O Madhusūdan; atra dehe–within the body; kaḥ adhiyajñaḥ–who or what is Adhiyajña, the agent of sacrifice? katham–How; (sthitaḥ)–is He present; asmin (dehe)–in this body? katham cha–And how; (tvam) jñeyaḥ asi–are You to be known; prayāṇa-kāle–at the time of death; niyata-ātmabhiḥ–by persons of controlled mind? [1–2]
1–2 Arjuna inquired: O Supreme Person, what is Brahma, and what is the soul? What is action, and what is the worldly plane? What is the celestial plane? O Madhusūdan: within the body, who is the agent of sacrifice, and how is He present? And how are You to be known by the self-controlled at the time of death?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
अक्षरं परमं ब्रह्म स्वभावोऽध्यात्ममुच्यते ।भूतभावोद्भवकरो विसर्गः कर्म्मसंज्ञितः ॥३॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
akṣaraṁ paramaṁ brahma svabhāvo ’dhyātmam uchyatebhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo visargaḥ karma-saṁjñitaḥ [3]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: brahma–Brahma; uchyate–means; akṣaram paramam–the imperishable Absolute. adhyātmam–The individual soul; (uchyate)–refers to; svabhāvaḥ–the pure spiritual nature. karma–Action; saṁjñitaḥ–means; visargaḥ–the creative force (or offerings to a demigod); bhūta-bhāva-udbhava-karaḥ–which manifests the bodies of the human and other species of life through the agency of gross and subtle material elements. [3]
3 The Supreme Lord spoke thus: It is said that Brahma is the imperishable Absolute, and the soul is the living being’s own pure spiritual nature. By action is meant the creative force (or offerings by charity, sacrifice, and austerity, etc., to a demigod), manifesting, through the gross and subtle elements, the bodies of the human and other species of life.
अधिभूतं क्षरो भावः पुरुषश्चाधिदैवतम् ।अधियज्ञोऽहमेवात्र देहे देहभृतां वर ॥४॥
adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ puruṣaś chādhidaivatamadhiyajño ’ham evātra dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara [4]
(he) deha-bhṛtām vara–O best of embodied beings, Arjuna; adhibhūtam–worldly existence; kṣaraḥ–is the perishable; bhāvaḥ–existence. adhidaivatam–Celestial existence; puruṣaḥ–is the collective universal form, in which are contained the demigods, headed by the solar gods; cha–and; aham eva–I, indeed; atra dehe–within this body; adhiyajñaḥ–am the Lord of sacrifice in the form of the Supersoul, the sanctioner and rewarder of the (sacrificial etc.) actions of the living beings. [4]
4 O Arjuna, best of beings, the worldly plane means that which is perishable (such as the body). The celestial plane is the collective universal form which encompasses and governs the demigods; and I am the Lord of sacrifice, present as the Supersoul within the bodies of all living beings, as the sanctioner and rewarder of their actions (of sacrifices, etc.).
अन्तकाले च मामेव स्मरन्मुक्त्वा कलेवरम् ।यः प्रयाति स मद्भावं याति नास्त्यत्र संशयः ॥५॥
anta-kāle cha mām eva smaran muktvā kalevaramyaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ [5]
anta-kāle cha–At the time of death; yaḥ–one who; smaran–thinks; mām eva–only of Me; muktvā–when leaving; kalevaram–the body; prayāti–departing this world; saḥ–he; yāti–attains to; mat-bhāvam–My nature. na asti–There is no; saṁśayaḥ–doubt; atra–in this respect. [5]
5 One who thinks of Me at the time of death attains to My nature on departing this world. Of this there is no doubt.
यं यं वापि स्मरन्भावं त्यजत्यन्ते कलेवरम् ।तं तमेवैति कौन्तेय सदा तद्भावभावितः ॥६॥
yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaramtaṁ tam evaiti kaunteya sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [6]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; (yaḥ)–one who; tyajati–leaves; kalevaram–the body; smaran–remembering; yam yam vā api–whatever; bhāvam–object; ante–at the time of death; eti–he attains; tam tam eva–to that very object; tat-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ–having absorbed his mind in thought of it; sadā–constantly. [6]
6 O son of Kuntī, one who has always thought of a particular object will remember it and attain to it after leaving the body.
तस्मात्सर्व्वेषु कालेषु मामनुस्मर युध्य च ।मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्मामेवैष्यस्यसंशयः ॥७॥
tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu mām anusmara yudhya chamayy arpita-mano-buddhir mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ [7]
tasmāt–Therefore; anusmara–remember; mām–Me; sarveṣu kāleṣu–at all times; cha–and; yudhya–fight, execute your natural duty. arpita-manaḥ-buddhiḥ–Offering mind and intelligence; mayi–unto Me; eva–certainly; eṣyasi–you will reach; mām–Me. asaṁśayaḥ–There is no doubt; (atra)–in this. [7]
7 Therefore always remembering Me, fight, as it is your natural duty. Thus dedicating your mind and intelligence to Me, you will reach Me. Of this there is no doubt.
अभ्यासयोगयुक्तेन चेतसा नान्यगामिना ।परमं पुरुषं दिव्यं याति पार्थानुचिन्तयन् ॥८॥
abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena chetasā nānya-gāmināparamaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ yāti pārthānuchintayan [8]
(he) pārtha–O son of Pṛthā; anuchintayan–thinking at every moment; divyam–of the effulgent; paramam puruṣam–Supreme Person; na anya-gāminā chetasā–by an undeviating mind; abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena–engaged in yoga practice; (yogī)–the yogī; yāti–reaches; (tam eva)–that Supreme Person. [8]
8 O Pārtha, the yogī who practises meditation with an undeviating mind, always thinking of the effulgent Supreme Person, reaches Him.
कविं पुराणमनुशासितारम्अणोरणीयांसमनुस्मरेद्यः ।सर्व्वस्य धातारमचिन्त्यरूपम्आदित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् ॥९।
प्रयाणकाले मनसाचले भक्त्या युक्तो योगबलेन चैव ।भ्रुवोर्मध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक्स तं परं पुरुषमुपैति दिव्यम् ॥१०॥
kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāramaṇor aṇīyāṁsam anusmared yaḥsarvasya dhātāram achintya-rūpamāditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt [9]
prayāṇa-kāle manasāchalenabhaktyā yukto yoga-balena chaivabhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyaksa taṁ paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam [10]
yaḥ–One who; prayāṇa-kāle–at the time of death; achalena manasā–with an unflickering mind; yoga-balena–by strength of yoga practice; bhaktyā yuktaḥ–being constantly engaged in smaraṇam, devotional remembrance; samyak āveśya cha–and fully concentrating; prāṇam–the life-force; bhruvoḥ madhye–between the eyebrows; anusmaret–meditates on; (param puruṣam)–the Supreme Person; kavim–the all-knowing; purāṇam–beginningless; anuśāsitāram–merciful teacher of devotion unto Himself; aṇoḥ aṇīyāṁsam–who is more subtle than the atom; sarvasya dhātāram–(yet) the support of all existence; achintya-rūpam–and of aprākṛta or supramundane form—medium-sized—of human feature; āditya-varṇam–possessing a radiant form, which, like the sun, illuminates both Himself and others; tamasaḥ parastāt–and is transcendental to material nature; eva–certainly; saḥ–that person; upaiti–reaches; tam–that; divyam–effulgent; param–Supreme; puruṣam–Person. [9–10]
9–10 He, the Supreme Person, is the all-knowing, beginingless, merciful teacher of devotion unto Himself. Although more subtle that the atom, He is the infinite support of all existence. His form is supramundane, that is, of a humanlike feature, yet He is self-illuminating and all-illuminating like the sun. He is transcendental to illusion. One whose mind is fully focused by strength of yoga practice, who continuously remembers Him with devotion, and who at the time of death establishes the life-force between the eyebrows (at the ājñā-chakra) with full concentration, thinking of Him, reaches the effulgent Supreme Person.
यदक्षरं वेदविदो वदन्तिविशन्ति यद्यतयो वीतरागाः ।यदिच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचर्य्यं चरन्तितत्ते पदं सङ्ग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्ये ॥११॥
yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadantiviśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥyad ichchhanto brahmacharyaṁ charantitat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye [11]
saṅgraheṇa–Along with the method of attaining it; (aham)–I; pravakṣye–shall describe; te–to you; tat padam–that objective; yat–which; veda-vidaḥ–the learned knowers of the Vedas; vadanti–call; akṣaram–the imperishable, Oṁkār, denoting Brahma; yat–which; vīta-rāgāḥ–the desireless; yatayaḥ–ascetics; viśanti–enter; ichchhantaḥ–and aspiring to reach; yat–which; (brahmachāriṇaḥ)–the brahmachārīs, celibate seekers of the Absolute; charanti–maintain; brahmacharyam–the vow of celibacy. [11]
11 Along with the method of attaining it, I shall describe to you that objective which the learned knowers of the Vedas call Om, the Imperishable, within which the desireless ascetics enter, and which the devout seekers aspire to reach by practising the vow of celibacy.
सर्व्वद्वाराणि संयम्य मनो हृदि निरुध्य च ।मूर्ध्न्यधायात्मनः प्राणमास्थितो योगधारणाम् [१२]
ओमित्येकाक्षरं ब्रह्म व्याहरन्मामनुस्मरन् ।यः प्रयाति त्यजन्देहं स याति परमां गतिम् ॥१३॥
sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya mano hṛdi nirudhya chamūrdhny ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam āsthito yoga-dhāraṇām [12]
om ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma vyāharan mām anusmaranyaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ sa yāti paramāṁ gatim [13]
saṁyamya–Controlling; sarva-dvārāṇi–all the gateways of the senses—stopping them from accepting the objects of the senses; nirudhya–steadying; manaḥ–the mind; hṛdi–within the heart; ādhāya cha–and establishing; prāṇam–the vital life-air; mūrdhni–between the eyebrows; āsthitaḥ–remaining; yoga-dhāraṇām–in samādhi through the practice of dhāraṇā, yogic concentration; ātmanaḥ–on the spiritual self; vyāharan–and uttering; oṁ iti–thus, Om; eka-akṣaram–the monosyllable; brahma–sound vibration of Brahma; anusmaran mām–in full remembrance of Me; saḥ yaḥ–he who; deham tyajan–leaving the body; prayāti–thus departs; yāti–attains; paramām gatim–the supreme goal—the spiritual plane or sālokya-mukti. [12, 13]
12 , 13 Controlling all the gateways of the senses, holding the mind steady within the heart, establishing the life-force between the eyebrows, and fully absorbing the thoughts in the spiritual self, one who at the time of leaving the body vibrates the monosyllable Om and departs the world in consciousness of Me, reaches the transcendental world.
अनन्यचेताः सततं यो मां स्मरति नित्यशः ।तस्याहं सुलभः पार्थ नित्ययुक्तस्य योगिनः ॥१४॥
ananya-chetāḥ satataṁ yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥtasyāhaṁ sulabhaḥ pārtha nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ [14]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; yaḥ–one who; ananya-chetāḥ–one-pointedly (without the practices of karma, jñān, etc., or without desiring their objectives of heaven, liberation, etc.); satatam–in all circumstances; nityaśaḥ–always; smarati–remembers; mām–Me; tasya yoginaḥ–for such a person in a relationship of dāsya, sakhya, etc.; nitya-yuktasya–who constantly aspires for My divine association; aham–I; sulabhaḥ–am easily reached. [14]
14 O Pārtha, a person who one-pointedly remembers Me always, in all circumstances, and who, in his relationship with Me (in servitude, friendship, etc.) constantly aspires for My divine association—I am easily reached by such a devotee.
मामुपेत्य पुनर्जन्म दुःखालयमशाश्वतम् ।नाप्नुवन्ति महात्मानः संसिद्धिं परमां गताः ॥१५॥
mām upetya punar janma duḥkhālayam aśāśvatamnāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ [15]
mahātmānaḥ–The great souls; gatāḥ–who have attained; paramām saṁsiddhim–the highest perfection, My association in My Pastimes; upetya–having reached; mām–Me; na āpnuvanti–do not take; punaḥ–again; janma–a birth; aśāśvatam–of impermanence; duḥkhālayam–which is the abode of suffering. [15]
15 The great souls who become My associates in My divine Pastimes, having reached Me, are never again born into transitory existence, which is the abode of suffering.
आब्रह्मभुवनाल्लोकाः पुनरावर्त्तिनोऽर्ज्जुन ।मामुपेत्य तु कौन्तेय पुनर्जन्म न विद्यते ॥१६॥
ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino ’rjunamām upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate [16]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; ābrahma-bhuvanāt–from Brahmaloka, the highest plane in the universe, downwards; lokāḥ–all planes or their residents; punaḥ āvartinaḥ–by nature repeatedly return; tu–but; (he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; mām upetya–reaching Me, atttaing My shelter; na vidyate–there is no; punaḥ janma–rebirth. [16]
16 O Arjuna, from the plane of Lord Brahmā downwards, all planes or their residents are subject to return. But, O Kaunteya, there is no rebirth after reaching Me.
सहस्रयुगपर्य्यन्तमहर्यद्ब्रह्मणो विदुः ।रात्रिं युगसहस्रान्तां तेऽहोरात्रविदो जनाः ॥१७॥
sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥrātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ te ’ho-rātra-vido janāḥ [17]
te janāḥ (ye)–Those who; viduḥ–know; brahmanaḥ–Lord Brahmā’s; ahaḥ–day; yat–which; sahasra-yuga-paryantam–comprises the duration of one thousand chatur-yugas; rātrim–and (his) night; yuga-sahasra-antām–of the duration of one thousand chatur-yugas; ahaḥ-rātra-vidaḥ–are knowers of day and night. [17]
17 A day of Lord Brahmā lasts for one thousand chatur-yugas*, and his night is of the same duration. Persons who know this have the true conception of day and night.
* One yuga (age) in the time calculation of the demigods equals the four yugas or one chatur-yuga in the time calculation of man, or 4,320,000 years.
अव्यक्ताद्व्यक्तयः सर्व्वाः प्रभवन्त्यहरागमे ।रात्र्यागमे प्रलीयन्ते तत्रैवाव्यक्तसंज्ञके ॥१८॥
avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ prabhavanty ahar-āgamerātry-āgame pralīyante tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake [18]
ahaḥ-āgame–With the coming of (Lord Brahmā’s) day; sarvāḥ vyaktayaḥ–universal progeny with their bodies, senses, enjoyable objects, and abodes; prabhavanti–are born; avyaktāt–of Lord Brahmā in his waking state; (punaḥ)–and again; rātri-āgame–with the coming of night; pralīyante–they are absorbed; tatra eva–within Lord Brahmā; avyakta-saṁjñake–who is known as avyakta, ‘the unmanifest.’ [18]
18 With the coming of day, the universal progeny with their bodies, senses, enjoyable objects, and abodes are born of Lord Brahmā in his waking state; and at nightfall, they are again absorbed into Lord Brahmā, who is known as ‘the unmanifest.’
भूतग्रामः स एवायं भूत्वा भूत्वा प्रलीयते ।रात्र्यागमेऽवशः पार्थ प्रभवत्यहरागमे ॥१९।
bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyaterātry-āgame ’vaśaḥ pārtha prabhavaty ahar-āgame [19]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; avaśaḥ (san)–helplessly; being subject to the law of karma; ayam saḥ eva bhūta-grāmaḥ–the multitude of beings; bhūtvā bhūtvā–being repeatedly born; ahaḥ-āgame–with the coming of the day of Lord Brahmā; pralīyate–disappear; rātri-āgame–at nightfall; prabhavati–and are born; (punaḥ ahaḥ-āgame)–with a new day. [19]
19 O Pārtha, the multitude of beings are helplessly (subject to the law of karma) born again and again. With the coming of Lord Brahmā’s night they are absorbed, and with the coming of his day they are again born.
परस्तस्मात्तु भावोऽन्योऽव्यक्तोऽव्यक्तात्सनातनः ।यः स सर्व्वेषु भूतेषु नश्यत्सु न विनश्यति ॥२०॥
paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo ’vyakto ’vyaktāt sanātanaḥyaḥ sa sarveṣu bhūteṣu naśyatsu na vinaśyati [20]
tu–But; paraḥ–beyond, superior; tasmāt avyaktāt–to this unmanifest Hiraṇyagarbha (‘born within the golden egg, the universe’), Lord Brahmā; (asti)–is; anyaḥ–another; avyaktaḥ–unmanifest, imperceptible, transcendental; sanātanaḥ–beginningless; bhāvaḥ–existence: saḥ yaḥ–He who; na vinaśyati–is not destroyed; sarveṣu bhūteṣu naśyatsu–when all beings are destroyed. [20]
20 But superior to this unmanifest (Lord Brahmā) there is another unmanifest, and that existence is beginningless and transcendental to the perception of the living beings. He is not destroyed when all beings are destroyed.
अव्यक्तोऽक्षर इत्युक्तस्तमाहुः परमां गतिम् ।यं प्राप्य न निवर्त्तन्ते तद्धाम परमं मम ॥२१॥
avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatimyaṁ prāpya na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [21]
(saḥ)–He; uktaḥ iti–is said to be; avyaktaḥ akṣaraḥ (cha)–the Unmanifest and the Invincible. (vedāntāḥ)–The Upaniṣads; āhuḥ–proclaim; tam–Him; paramām gatim–the supreme destination; yam prāpya–reaching whom; (jīvāḥ)–the living beings; na nivartate–do not return. (viddhi)–Know; tat–that as; mama–My; paramam dhāma–supreme abode. [21]
21 He is said to be the Unmanifest and the Invincible, proclaimed (by the Upaniṣads) to be the supreme goal, reaching whom one does not return to this world. Know that destination to be My supreme abode.
पुरुषः स परः पार्थ भक्त्या लभ्यस्त्वनन्यया ।यस्यान्तःस्थानि भूतानि येन सर्व्वमिदं ततम् ॥२२॥
puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayāyasyāntaḥsthāni bhūtāni yena sarvam idaṁ tatam [22]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; (aham)–I; saḥ paraḥ puruṣaḥ–the Supreme Person; antaḥ–within; yasya–whom; bhūtāni–all beings; sthāni–are situated; yena–and by whom; idam–this; sarvam–whole universe; tatam–is pervaded; labhyaḥ (bhavāmi)–am attainable; ananyayā bhaktyā tu–only by exclusive devotion. [22]
22 O Pārtha, I, the Supreme Person, within whom all beings are situated and by whom this whole universe is pervaded, am attainable only by exclusive devotion.
यत्र काले त्वनावृत्तिमावृत्तिञ्चैव योगिनः ।प्रयाता यान्ति तं कालं वक्ष्यामि भरतर्षभ ॥२३॥
yatra kāle tv anāvṛttim āvṛttiñ chaiva yoginaḥprayātā yānti taṁ kālaṁ vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha [23]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O Arjuna, best of the Bhāratas; (aham)–I; vakṣyāmi–shall now describe; tam kālam eva–that moment; yatra kāle tu–when; prayātāḥ–death occurs; yoginaḥ–the yogīs; yānti–attain; anāvṛttim–liberation; āvṛttim cha–or rebirth. [23]
23 O Bharatarṣabha, now I shall describe to you the circumstances in which the yogīs attain either liberation or rebirth at the moment of death.
अग्निर्ज्योतिरहः शुक्लः षण्मासा उत्तरायणम् ।तत्र प्रयाता गच्छन्ति ब्रह्म ब्रह्मविदो जनाः ॥२४॥
agnir jyotir ahaḥ śuklaḥ ṣaṇ-māsā uttarāyaṇamtatra prayātā gachchhanti brahma brahma-vido janāḥ [24]
(yatra)–The path on which; agniḥ jyotiḥ–the deities of fire and light; ahaḥ–the deity of day; suklaḥ–the deity of the waxing moon; uttarāyaṇam ṣaṭ-māsāḥ–and the deity of the sun’s six-monthly northern ascent; (avasthitaḥ)–preside; brahma-vidaḥ janāḥ–the knowers of Brahma; prayātāḥ–going, i.e. leaving the body; tatra–on that path; gachchhanti–attain; brahma–Brahma. [24]
24 Upon leaving the body, the knowers of Brahma attain Brahma via the path of fire, light, day, the waxing moon, and the sun’s northern ascent.
धूमो रात्रिस्तथा कृष्णः षण्मासा दक्षिणायनम्  ।तत्र चान्द्रमसं ज्योतिर्योगी प्राप्य निवर्त्तते ॥२५॥
dhūmo rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanamtatra chāndramasaṁ jyotir yogī prāpya nivartate [25]
(yatra)–The path on which; dhūmaḥ–the deity of smoke; rātriḥ–the deity of night; kṛṣṇaḥ–the deity of the waning moon; tathā ṣaṭ-māsāḥ dakṣiṇāyanam–and the deity of the sun’s six-monthly southern ascent; (avasthitaḥ)–preside; yogī–the (karma-) yogī; (prayātaḥ)–who goes; tatra–on that path; prāpya–reaching; chāndramasam jyotiḥ–Svarga-loka, the heavenly plane; nivartate–returns–undergoes rebirth. [25]
25 Upon leaving the body, the karma-yogī reaches the heavenly plane via the path of smoke, night, the waning moon, and the sun’s southern ascent, but returns to undergo rebirth.
शुक्लकृष्णे गती ह्येते जगतः शाश्वते मते ।एकया यात्यनावृत्तिमन्ययावर्त्तते पुनः ॥२६॥
śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete jagataḥ śāśvate mateekayā yāty anāvṛttim anyayāvartate punaḥ [26]
ete–These; gatī śukla-kṛṣṇe–two paths, bright and dark; jagataḥ–of the world (where persons are apt to follow the paths of jñān and karma); mate–are considered; śāśvate hi–perpetual. ekayā–By one; anāvṛttim–liberation; yāti–is attained; anyayā–by the other; punaḥ āvartate–one returns, is reborn. [26]
26 These two paths of the world, the bright and the dark, are accepted as being perpetual. By the bright path liberation is attained, and by the dark path one is reborn.
नैते सृती पार्थ जानन्योगी मुह्यति कश्चन ।तस्मात्सर्व्वेषु कालेषु योगयुक्तो भवार्ज्जुन ॥२७॥
naite sṛtī pārtha jānan yogī muhyati kaśchanatasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu yoga-yukto bhavārjuna [27]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha (Arjuna); jānan–knowing; ete–this; sṛtī–pair of paths; kaśchana yogī–any (bhakti-) yogī (one engaged in the devotional service of the Lord); na muhyati–is not deluded. tasmāt–Therefore; (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; sarveṣu kāleṣu–always; bhava–be; yoga-yuktaḥ–engaged in yoga. [27]
27 O Pārtha, the devotee (bhakti-yogī) who knows these bright and dark paths is not deluded. Therefore, O Arjuna, be ever fixed in transcendental, exclusive devotion.
वेदेषु यज्ञेषु तपःसु चैवदानेषु यत्पुण्यफलं प्रदिष्टम् ।अत्येति तत्सर्व्वमिदं विदित्वायोगी परं स्थानमुपैति चाद्यम् ॥२८॥
vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu chaivadāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭamatyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvāyogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti chādyam [28]
viditvā–Knowing; idam–this—My supremacy and the supremacy of My devotion; yogī–the yogī, the devoted soul; atyeti–transcends; tat sarvam puṇya-phalam–all those fruits of piety; vedeṣu–achieved by chanting the Vedas; yajñeṣu–performing sacrifice; tapaḥsu–performing austerity; dāneṣu eva cha–and performing charity; yat–which; pradiṣṭam–have been mentioned in the scriptures; cha–and; upaiti–attains; param–the supreme; ādyam–original; sthānam–place. [28]
28 Thus knowing of My glories and the glories of devotion to Me, the devoted soul, surpassing the scripturally cited fruits of piety achieved by chanting the Vedas and performing sacrifice, austerity, and charity, attains My supreme, holy abode.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे तारकब्रह्मयोगो नामाष्टमोऽध्यायः ॥८॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde tāraka-brahma-yogo nāmāṣṭamo ’dhyāyaḥ [8]
End of Chapter EightThe Merciful Absolutefrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
नवमोऽध्यायः
Chapter Nine Rāja-guhya-yoga The Hidden Treasure of Devotion
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
इदं तु ते गुह्यतमं प्रवक्ष्याम्यनसूयवे ।ज्ञानं विज्ञानसहितं यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात् ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
idaṁ tu te guhyatamaṁ pravakṣyāmy anasūyavejñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (aham) pravakṣyāmi–I now tell; te–you; anasūyave–who are without envy; idam–this; guhyatamam–most hidden; jñānam–knowledge of pure devotion for Me (singing My glories which expands into unlimited services); vijñāna-sahitam tu–up to direct realisation of Me; jñātvā–knowing; yat–which; (tvam)–you; mokṣyase–will be liberated; aśubhāt–from inauspiciousness, or, from all that is opposed to devotion. [1]
1 The Supreme Lord said: I now reveal to you, who are without envy, this most hidden treasure of knowledge of pure devotion, with direct realisation of Me, knowing which you will be liberated from inauspiciousness—from all that is opposed to devotion.
राजविद्या राजगुह्यं पवित्रमिदमुत्तमम् ।प्रत्यक्षावगमं धर्म्म्यं सुसुखं कर्त्तुमव्ययम् ॥२॥
rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ pavitram idam uttamampratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ susukhaṁ kartum avyayam [2]
(viddhi)–Know; idam–this; rāja-vidyā–as the king of knowledge; rāja-guhyam–the most secret of secrets; uttamam–supreme; pavitram–pure; pratyakṣa-avagamam–attained by direct realisation; dharmyam–the perfection of religion; kartum susukham–very easy to practise; avyayam (cha)–and imperishable. [2]
2 Know this to be the king of secrets, the king of knowledge, supreme, pure, and imperishable. It is known by direct realisation (by one eager to serve Me), it is the perfection of religion, and very easy to practise.
अश्रद्दधानाः पुरुषा धर्म्मस्यास्य परन्तप ।अप्राप्य मां निवर्त्तन्ते मृत्युसंसारवर्त्त्मनि ॥३॥
aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā dharmasyāsya parantapaaprāpya māṁ nivartante mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani [3]
(he) parantapa–O conqueror of the enemy; puruṣāḥ–persons; aśraddadhānāḥ–lacking faith; asya dharmasya–in this pure life of devotion for Me; aprāpya–unable to reach; mām–Me; nivartante–ever revolve; mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani–on the path of death in the material world. [3]
3 O conqueror of the enemy, men who have no faith in this hidden treasure of devotion to Me are unable to reach Me, and so they remain wandering on the path of death in the material world.
मया ततमिदं सर्व्वं जगदव्यक्तमूर्त्तिना ।मत्स्थानि सर्व्वभूतानि न चाहं तेष्ववस्थितः ॥४॥
mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ jagad avyakta-mūrtināmat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni na chāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ [4]
idam–This; sarvam jagat–whole world; tatam–is pervaded; mayā–by Me; avyakta-mūrtinā–by My unmanifest form. sarva-bhūtāni–All beings; mat-sthāni–are situated in Me, the infinite; aham cha–but I; na avasthitaḥ–am not situated; teṣu–in them. [4]
4 This entire universe is pervaded by Me in My unmanifest form, and all beings are situated in Me; yet I am not in them.
न च मत्स्थानि भूतानि पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम् ।भूतभृन्न च भूतस्थो ममात्मा भूतभावनः ॥५॥
na cha mat-sthāni bhūtāni paśya me yogam aiśvarambhūta-bhṛn na cha bhūta-stho mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ [5]
bhūtāni na cha mat-sthāni–Yet all beings are not situated in Me. paśya–Behold; me–My; aiśvaram yogam–supreme mystical power. mama–My; ātmā–self; bhūta-bhṛt–is the mainstay; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ cha–and origin of all beings; (kintu)–yet; na bhūta-sthaḥ–is not in them. [5]
5 Again, they are not in Me. Behold My supreme mystical power of inconceivable oneness and difference (achintya-bhedābheda). I, Myself, am the mainstay and origin of all beings, but I am not in them.
यथाकाशस्थितो नित्यं वायुः सर्व्वत्रगो महान्तथा सर्व्वाणि भूतानि मत्स्थानीत्युपधारय ॥६॥
yathākāśa-sthito nityaṁ vāyuḥ sarvatra-go mahāntathā sarvāṇi bhūtāni mat-sthānīty upadhāraya [6]
upadhāraya–Conceive; iti–in this way: yathā–as; mahān–the mighty; vāyuḥ–air or wind; sarvatra-gaḥ–going everywhere; nityam–always; ākāśa-sthitaḥ–rests in the sky; tathā–similarly; sarvāṇi bhūtāni–all beings; mat-sthāni–rest in Me. [6]
6 Know that as the mighty wind blowing everywhere rests always in the sky, similarly, all beings rest in Me.
सर्व्वभूतानि कौन्तेय प्रकृतिं यान्ति मामिकाम् ।कल्पक्षये पुनस्तानि कल्पादौ विसृजाम्यहम् ॥७॥
sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikāmkalpa-kṣaye punas tāni kalpādau visṛjāmy aham [7]
(he) kaunteya–O Kaunteya; kalpa-kṣaye–at the millenium’s end; sarva-bhūtāni–all beings; yānti–merge; māmikām prakṛtim–in My trimodal material nature. kalpa-adau–With a new day of Brahmā; aham–I; visṛjāmi–manifest; tāni–them; punaḥ–again. [7]
7 O son of Kuntī, at the end of the millenium, all beings are merged in the material nature of three modes, which is My external potency; and at the beginning of a new millennium, I make them manifest again.
प्रकृतिं स्वामवष्टभ्य विसृजामि पुनः पुनः ।भूतग्राममिमं कृत्स्नमवशं प्रकृतेर्वशात् ॥८॥
prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥbhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt [8]
avaṣṭabhya–Controlling; svām prakṛtim–My trimodal nature; (aham)–I; punaḥ punaḥ–repeatedly; visṛjāmi–manifest; imam–this; kṛtsnam–entire; bhūta-grāmam–multitude of beings; avaśam–who are helplessly; prakṛteḥ vaśāt–controlled by their natures acquired through their previous actions. [8]
8 I control My potency of material nature, to repeatedly manifest the multitude of beings, who are helplessly controlled by their natures.
न च मां तानि कर्म्माणि निबध्नन्ति धनञ्जय ।उदासीनवदासीनमसक्तं तेषु कर्म्मसु ॥९॥
na cha māṁ tāni karmāṇi nibadhnanti dhanañjayaudāsīnavad āsīnam asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu [9]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Dhanañjaya; tāni karmāṇi–those actions of manifestation, sustenance, and withdrawal; na nibadhnanti–cannot bind; mām–Me; asaktam–who am detached; udāsīnavat āsīnam cha–remaining as neutral; teṣu karmasu–in those actions. [9]
9 O conqueror of wealth, I remain detached and situated as neutral in the cosmic manifestation, sustenance, and withdrawal, and these functions cannot bind Me.
मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः सूयते सचराचरम् ।हेतुनानेन कौन्तेय जगद्विपरिवर्त्तते ॥१०॥
mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-charācharamhetunānena kaunteya jagad viparivartate [10]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna; mayā adhyakṣeṇa–ordained by Me; prakṛtiḥ–My māyā potency; sūyate–produces; (jagat)–the universe; sa-chara-acharam–with moving and stationary beings. anena hetunā–By this cause; jagat–the universe; viparivartate–is repeatedly manifest. [10]
10 O Kaunteya, ordained by Me, My illusory potency produces this universe of moving and stationary beings. Thus it is manifest over and over again.
अवजानन्ति मां मूढा मानुषीं तनुमाश्रितम् ।परं भावमजानन्तो मम भूतमहेश्वरम् ॥११॥
avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritamparaṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama bhūta-maheśvaram [11]
ajānantaḥ–Not knowing; param–the transcendental; bhāvam–nature, reality; mama āśritam mānuṣīm tanum–of My form of human features; mūḍhāḥ–ignorant persons; avajānanti–considering Me a mere mortal, blaspheme; mām–Me; bhūta-mahā-īśvaram–the Supreme Lord of all beings. [11]
11 Not knowing the transcendental nature of My form of human features, ignorant persons blaspheme Me, the Supreme Lord of all beings, considering Me a mere mortal.
मोघाशा मोघकर्म्माणो मोघज्ञाना विचेतसः ।राक्षसीमासुरीञ्चैव प्रकृतिं मोहिनीं श्रिताः ॥१२॥
moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo mogha-jñānā vichetasaḥrākṣasīm āsurīñ chaiva prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ [12]
(te)–They; (bhavanti)–remain; mogha-āśāḥ–with vain hopes; mogha-karmāṇaḥ–vain actions; mogha-jñānāḥ–vain knowledge; (cha)–and; vichetasaḥ–vain thoughts; śritāḥ–adopting; rākṣasīm–the ignorant; āsurīm cha–and passionate, demoniac; prakṛtim eva–nature; mohinīm–causing their delusion, their downfall. [12]
12 Their hopes, acts, knowledge, and thoughts all in vain, such persons acquire the ignorant and demoniac nature, which leads to their downfall.
महात्मानस्तु मां पार्थ दैवीं प्रकृतिमाश्रिताः ।भजन्त्यनन्यमनसो ज्ञात्वा भूतादिमव्ययम् ॥१३॥
mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥbhajanty ananya-manaso jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam [13]
tu–But; (he) pārtha–O son of Pṛthā, Arjuna; āśritāḥ–taking refuge in; daivīm prakṛtim–the godly nature; mahā-ātmānaḥ–the great-hearted, the devoted souls; jñātvā–knowing; mām–Me; bhūta-ādim–as the origin of all that be; (cha)–and; avyayam–imperishable; bhajanti–worship, adore; (mām)–Me; ananya-manasaḥ–whole-heartedly. [13]
13 But, O Pārtha, the great-hearted souls take refuge in the divine nature, and they whole-heartedly worship and adore Me, knowing Me as the eternal origin of all.
सततं कीर्त्तयन्तो मां यतन्तश्च दृढव्रताः ।नमस्यन्तश्च मां भक्त्या नित्ययुक्ता उपासते ॥१४॥
satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś cha dṛḍha-vratāḥnamasyantaś cha māṁ bhaktyā nitya-yuktā upāsate [14]
satatam–At all times, in all places and circumstances; mām kīrtayantaḥ–singing the glories of My divine Name, form, etc.; yatantaḥ–striving to learn spiritual truths of My transcendental nature, personality, etc.; dṛḍha-vratāḥ cha–and unfailingly following the devotional observances such as Ekādaśī and regular chanting of the Holy Name; namasyantaḥ cha–offering obeisances unto Me and following all the practices of devotion; (te)–they; upāsate–worship; mām–Me; bhaktyā–with devotion; nitya-yuktāḥ–earnestly aspiring for their eternal relationship with Me. [14]
14 They continually chant My glories, strive to learn spiritual truths about Me, and faithfully follow the devotional practices. Bowing to Me and worshipping Me with devotion, they aspire for their eternal relationship with Me.
ज्ञानयज्ञेन चाप्यन्ये यजन्तो मामुपासते ।एकत्वेन पृथक्त्वेन बहुधा विश्वतोमुखम् ॥१५॥
jñāna-yajñena chāpy anye yajanto mām upāsateekatvena pṛthaktvena bahudhā viśvato-mukham [15]
api cha–Also; jñāna-yajñena–by performing the ‘knowledge-sacrifice’; anye–others, self-worshippers; yajantaḥ–who offer oblations; mām upāsate–worship Me; ekatvena–conscious of oneness; (anye cha)–and others, external form-worshippers; (mām upāsate)–worship Me; pṛthaktvena–Viṣṇu, but in the form of demigods, conscious of differentiation; (anye cha)–and yet others; (mām upāsate)–worship Me; bahudhā–in many ways; viśvataḥ-mukham–as the cosmic or universal form. [15]
15 Others perform the ‘knowledge-sacrifice’ and worship Me in oneness, others worship Me in differentiation, and yet others worship Me in a multitude of ways as the universal form.
अहं क्रतुरहं यज्ञः स्वधाहमहमौषधम् ।मन्त्रोऽहमहमेवाज्यमहमग्निरहं हुतम् ॥१६॥
ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ svadhāham aham auṣadhammantro ’ham aham evājyam aham agnir ahaṁ hutam [16]
aham kratuḥ–I am the fire sacrifices Agniṣṭoma, Atyāgniṣṭoma, Uktha, Ṣoḍaśi, Atirātra, Aptoryāma and Vājapeya, collectively known as Jyotiṣṭoma; aham yajñaḥ–I am the five types of sacrifices to demigod deities such as the Viśvadevas and others according to the smṛti scriptures; aham svadhā–I am the obsequial oblation offered to the ancestors; aham auṣadham–I am the food; aham mantraḥ–I am the sacred incantation; aham ājyam–I am the ghee (clarified butter) and other sacrificial ingredients; aham agniḥ–I am the fire; aham hutam eva–I am the act of offering. [16]
16 I am the Vedic Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice and the five sacrifices to the Viśvadeva demigods and others as enjoined in the smṛti scriptures. I am the oblation to the ancestors, the food, and the mantra. I am the sacrificial ingredients such as ghee, I am the consecrated fire, and I am the act of offering.
पिताहमस्य जगतो माता धाता पितामहः ।वेद्यं पवित्रमोंकार ऋक्साम यजुरेव च ॥१७॥
pitāham asya jagato mātā dhātā pitāmahaḥvedyaṁ pavitram oṁkāra ṛk sāma yajur eva cha [17]
aham pitā–I am the father; asya jagataḥ–of this universe; mātā–the mother; dhātā–the ordainer of the living beings’ fruits of actions; pitāmahaḥ–the grandfather; vedyam–the object of all knowledge; pavitram oṁkāraḥ–the purifying praṇava monosyllable; ṛk–the Ṛg-veda; sāma–Sāma-veda; yajuḥ eva cha–and Yajur-veda. [17]
17 I am the father and the mother of the universe, the ordainer of the living beings’ fruits of actions, the forefather, and the object of all knowledge. I am the purifying Om, the Ṛg-, Sāma-, and Yajur-vedas.
गतिर्भर्त्ता प्रभुः साक्षी निवासः शरणं सुहृत् ।प्रभवः प्रलयः स्थानं निधानं बीजमव्ययम् ॥१८॥
gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣī nivāsaḥ śaraṇaṁ suhṛtprabhavaḥ pralayaḥ sthānaṁ nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam [18]
(aham) gatiḥ–I am the fruit of action; bhartā–the maintainer; prabhuḥ–the Lord; sākṣī–the witness; nivāsaḥ–the refuge; śaraṇam–the guardian; suhṛt–the true friend; prabhavaḥ–the universal manifestation; pralayaḥ–withdrawal; sthānam–and sustenance; nidhānam–the reservoir; avyayam bījam–the imperishable seed. [18]
18 And I am the goal, the maintainer, master, witness, refuge, guardian, and true friend. I am the universal manifestation, sustenance, and withdrawal. I am the reservoir, I am the original seed, I am the imperishable Supreme Lord.
तपाम्यहमहं वर्षं निगृह्णाम्युत्सृजामि च ।अमृतञ्चैव मृत्युश्च सदसच्चाहमर्ज्जुन ॥१९॥
tapāmy aham ahaṁ varṣaṁ nigṛhṇāmy utsṛjāmi chaamṛtañ chaiva mṛtyuś cha sad asach chāham arjuna [19]
cha–And; (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; aham tapāmi–I give heat; aham utsṛjāmi–I bring forth; varṣam–rain; nigṛhṇāmi cha–and I withdraw it. aham eva amṛtam–I am immortality; mṛtyuḥ cha–and death; sat–truth; asat cha–and untruth. [19]
19 O Arjuna, I give heat, and the rain comes and goes by My will. I am immortality and death. I am truth and untruth.
त्रैविद्या मां सोमपाः पूतपापायज्ञैरिष्ट्वा स्वर्गतिं प्रार्थयन्ते ।ते पुण्यमासाद्य सुरेन्द्रलोकम्अश्नन्ति दिव्यान्दिवि देवभोगान् ॥२०॥
trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpāyajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayantete puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokamaśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān [20]
trai-vidyāḥ–Performers of the fruitive rituals of the Ṛg-, Yajur- and Sāma-vedas; soma-pāḥ–who take the remnants of soma-rasa, a beverage made from the soma creeper, dear to the demigods; pūta-pāpāḥ–and are purified of sin; iṣṭvā–having worshipped; mām–Me; yajñaiḥ–by sacrifice, but indirectly through the demigods; prārthayante–pray; svar-gatim–to attain the heavenly plane, the abode of the demigods. āsādya–Reaching; puṇyam–in reward for their piety; sura-indra-lokam–the plane of Indra, heaven; te aśnanti–they enjoy; divyān–the exalted; deva-bhogān–happiness of the demigods; divi–in heaven. [20]
20 Persons who perform the fruitive ritualistic sacrifices prescribed in three of the Vedas worship Indra and other demigods. In fact, they worship Me, but in an indirect way. They drink the sacrificial remnants of the soma beverage, purify themselves of sin, and pray to attain the heavenly plane. As the result of their piety, they reach heaven and enjoy celestial pleasures.
ते तं भुक्त्वा स्वर्गलोकं विशालंक्षीणे पुण्ये मर्त्त्यलोकं विशन्ति ।एवं त्रयीधर्म्ममनुप्रपन्नगतागतं कामकामा लभन्ते ॥२१॥
te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁkṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśantievaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannāgatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante [21]
bhuktvā–After enjoying; tam–that; viśālam–vast; svarga-lokam–heavenly plane; puṇye kṣīṇe–with the exhaustion of their peity; te–they; viśanti–enter; martya-lokam–the human plane. evam–In this way; kāma-kāmāḥ–those desiring enjoyment; anuprapannāḥ–given to; trayī-dharmam–the worship prescribed in three of the Vedas; labhante–attain; gata-agatam–coming and going in this world. [21]
21 After enjoying the vast heavenly plane, upon the exhaustion of their pious merits they return to the human plane. In this way, persons desiring enjoyment who follow the Vedic rituals for demigod worship come and go—they undergo repeated birth and death in this material world.
अनन्याश्चिन्तयन्तो मां ये जनाः पर्य्युपासते ।तेषां नित्याभियुक्तानां योगक्षेमं वहाम्यहम् ॥२२॥
ananyāś chintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsateteṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham [22]
aham–I; vahāmi–bear; yoga-kṣemam–the responsibility of providing and protecting the necessities; teṣām–of those; nitya-abhiyuktānām–who are exclusively devoted to Me; ye janāḥ–and who; ananyāḥ–exclusively; mām chintyantaḥ–always think of Me; pari-upāsate–and worship Me in all respects, every relationship. [22]
22 I bear the responsibility of acquiring and protecting the necessities of My fully dependent devotees who are always absorbed in thought of Me, and who worship Me in every way.
येऽप्यन्यदेवताभक्ता यजन्ते श्रद्धयान्विताः ।तेऽपि मामेव कौन्तेय यजन्त्यविधिपूर्व्वकम् ॥२३॥
ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā yajante śraddhayānvitāḥte ’pi mām eva kaunteya yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam [23]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; ye–those persons who; anya-devatā-bhaktāḥ api–although devotees of ‘other gods’; yajante–worship the demigods; śraddhayā-anvitāḥ–with faith; te api–they too; yajanti–worship; mām eva–Me; avidhi-pūrvakam–but not in a way appropriate to attaining Me. [23]
23 O Kaunteya, the devotees of the demigods who have faith in worshipping them, are actually worshipping Me, but incorrectly.
अहं हि सर्व्वयज्ञानां भोक्ता च प्रभुरेव च ।न तु मामभिजानन्ति तत्त्वेनातश्च्यवन्ति ते ॥२४॥
ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ bhoktā cha prabhur eva chana tu mām abhijānanti tattvenātaś chyavanti te [24]
aham hi–I alone am; bhoktā eva cha–the enjoyer; prabhuḥ cha–and the rewarder; sarva-yajñānām–of all sacrifices; tu–but; na abhijānanti–being ignorant; mām–of Me; tattvena–in truth; te–they; ataḥ–therefore; chyavanti–fall to take birth; (punaḥ)–again. [24]
24 I alone am the enjoyer and rewarder of all sacrifices, but being ignorant of My position, the demigod worshippers fall to take birth again.
यान्ति देवव्रता देवान्पितॄन्यान्ति पितृव्रताः ।भूतानि यान्ति भूतेज्या यान्ति मद्याजिनोऽपि माम् ॥२५॥
yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥbhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām [25]
deva-vratāḥ–The demigod worshippers; yānti–reach; devān–the demigods; pitṛ-vratāḥ–the ancestral worshippers; yānti–reach; pitṝṇ–their ancestors; bhūta-ijyāḥ–the spirit worshippers; yānti–reach; bhūtāni–the spirits; mat-yājinaḥ–My worshippers; yānti–reach; mām api–Me. [25]
25 The demigod worshippers reach the demigods, the forefather worshippers go to the plane of their ancestors, and the worshippers of the spirits go to the spirits. But those who worship Me come to Me.
पत्रं पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति ।तदहं भक्त्युपहृतमश्नामि प्रयतात्मनः ॥२६॥
patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayachchhatitad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ [26]
yaḥ–For one who; bhaktyā–with devotion; prayachchhati–offers; me–Me; patram–a leaf; puṣpam–a flower; phalam–fruit; toyam–water; aham–I; aśnāmi–partake of that—I affectionately accept; tat–that; bhakti-upahṛtam–devotional offering; (tasya)–of that person; prayata-ātmanaḥ–of clean heart. [26]
26 If one offers Me with devotion a leaf, flower, fruit, or water, I affectionately accept that offering of the clean hearted devotee.
यत्करोषि यदश्नासि यज्जुहोषि ददासि यत् ।यत्तपस्यसि कौन्तेय तत्कुरुष्व मदर्पणम् ॥२७॥
yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yatyat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam [27]
(he) kaunteya–O Arjuna, son of Kuntī; yat (tvam) karoṣi–whatever you do, general or scripturally prescribed actions; yat aśnāsi–whatever you eat; yat juhoṣi–whatever you offer in sacrifice; yat dadāsi–whatever you give in charity; yat tapasyasi–and whichever austerity you perform or vow you keep; tat kuruṣva–do that; mat-arpaṇam–as an offering unto Me. [27]
27 O Kaunteya, whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacrifice, whatever you give, and whatever vow you may keep—do everything as an offering unto Me.
शुभाशुभफलैरेवं मोक्ष्यसे कर्म्मबन्धनैः ।सन्न्यासयोगयुक्तात्मा विमुक्तो मामुपैष्यसि ॥२८॥
śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥsannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā vimukto mām upaiṣyasi [28]
(karma-kurvan)–Acting; evam–in this way; mokṣyase–you will be liberated; karma-bandhanaiḥ–from bondage to action; śubha-aśubha-phalaiḥ–and its auspicious or inauspicious results. sannyāsa-yoga-yukta-ātmā–With mind linked to Me by renouncing the fruits of your actions; vimuktaḥ (san)–being perfectly liberated; mām upaiṣyasi–you will reach Me. [28]
28 Acting thus, you will be freed from bondage to action and its auspicious or inauspicious results. With mind selflessly linked to Me, you will be perfectly liberated, and you will come to Me.
समोऽहं सर्व्वभूतेषु न मे द्वेष्योऽस्ति न प्रियः ।ये भजन्ति तु मां भक्त्या मयि ते तेषु चाप्यहम् ॥२९॥
samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā mayi te teṣu chāpy aham [29]
aham samaḥ–I am equal; sarva-bhūteṣu–to all beings; na asti–there is neither; dveṣyaḥ–an enemy; priyaḥ (cha) na–nor a friend; me–for Me;. tu–but; ye bhajanti–whoever serves; mām–Me; bhaktyā–with love; (yathā)–as; te–they; (āsaktāḥ)–are attached; mayi–to Me; aham api cha–I, too; (tathā āsaktiḥ)–am similarly attached; teṣu–to them. [29]
29 I am equal to all, so no one is My enemy or My friend. Yet, for those who serve Me with love, as they are bound by affection for Me, I am similarly bound by the tie of affection for them.
अपि चेत्सुदुराचारो भजते मामनन्यभाक् ।साधुरेव स मन्तव्यः सम्यग्व्यवसितो हि सः ॥३०॥
api chet sudurāchāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāksādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ [30]
chet–If; api–even; sudurāchāraḥ–a person of sinful practices; bhajate–serves; mām–Me; ananya-bhāk–with exclusive devotion (giving up all other endeavours such as karma and jñān); eva–certainly; saḥ mantavyaḥ–he should be regarded; sādhuḥ–as a saintly person; hi–because; saḥ samyak vyavasitaḥ–his resolve is perfect. [30]
30 If even a very sinful person serves Me exclusively with devotion, he should be regarded as saintly, for his resolve is perfect.
क्षिप्रं भवति धर्म्मात्मा शश्वच्छान्तिं निगच्छति ।कौन्तेय प्रतिजानीहि न मे भक्तः प्रणश्यति ॥३१॥
kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā śaśvach-chhāntiṁ nigachchhatikaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [31]
[1] (saḥ)–He (who dedicates himself to Me); kṣipram–swiftly; bhavati–becomes; dharma-ātmā–a person of virtuous practices; nigachchhati–and attains; śaśvat–constant; śāntim–peace, relief from obstacles. (he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; pratijānīhi–declare; (iti)–thus; me–My; bhaktaḥ–devotee; na praṇaśyati–is never vanquished. [31]
[2] (he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; pratijānīhi–promise and declare it; (iti)–that; me bhaktaḥ–My devotee; na praṇaśyati–is never vanquished. (saḥ)–That person who proclaims this; kṣipram–swiftly; bhavati–becomes; dharma-ātmā–virtuous, religious; nigachchhati–and attains; śaśvat–constant; śāntim–peace, joy. [31]
31 He swiftly becomes a person of virtuous practices and attains constant peace. O son of Kuntī, declare to the world that My devotee is never vanquished!
or
31 O son of Kuntī, declare to the world that My devotee is never vanquished. One who declares this swiftly becomes virtuous and attains eternal joy.
Commentary
The second interpretation of this verse was revealed to Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur in a dream.
In the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (11.11.32) Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:
आज्ञायैवं गुणान्दोषान्मयादिष्टानपि स्वकान् ।धर्म्मान्सन्त्यज्य यः सर्व्वान्मां भजेत्स च सत्तमः ॥
ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān mayādiṣṭān api svakāndharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān māṁ bhajet sa cha sattamaḥ
“The best of the saintly persons are those who have surpassed the forms of duties that I, Myself, have recommended in the scriptures for the people in general. Although it is My directive, they cross it and render loving service to Me.”
In society, one must obey the law, but there is also the situation of crossing the law to show fidelity to the king. If one risks his life and reputation, and crossing the general law enters the royal chamber to combat an assassin, then he will be considered the most loyal servitor. Similarly, the Lord is saying, “I have already given some direction for the people in general. Do this, don’t do that, don’t cross these laws, etc. But if for My interest anyone takes the risk of committing sin, then he should be considered the best of My devotees.
“So, Arjuna, go and declare it, promise to the public that the ananya-bhāk (verse 30), the exclusively devoted persons, will never come to ruin. Then you will get the benefit. You will become dharmātmā, religious, and attain eternal divine happiness. The ananya-bhāk, the exclusive devotees, have already crossed the threshold of dharma, the standard of dutifulness, and taken the risk to throw themselves fully into My service. Sarva dharmān parityajya Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja (18.66). There is no question of them ‘becoming’ virtuous or religious as they long before surpassed dharma and took the risk and entered into prema-dharma, My loving service, transcending both piety and sinfulness.”
मां हि पार्थ व्यपाश्रित्य येऽपि स्युः पापयोनयः ।स्त्रियो वैश्यास्तथा शूद्रास्तेऽपि यान्ति परां गतिम् ॥३२॥
māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥstriyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim [32]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; ye api–even those who; syuḥ–may be considered ; pāpa-yonayaḥ–low-born persons; striyaḥ–women; vaiśyāḥ–merchants; tathā śūdrāḥ–and labourers; vyapāśritya hi–if they take full shelter; mām–in Me; te api yānti–they, too, attain; parām gatim–the supreme destination. [32]
32 O son of Pṛthā, persons of low birth, women, merchants or labourers—they, too, attain the supreme destination by taking full refuge in Me.
किं पुनर्ब्राह्मणाः पुण्या भक्ता राजर्षयस्तथा ।अनित्यमसुखं लोकमिमं प्राप्य भजस्व माम् ॥३३॥
kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā bhaktā rājarṣayas tathāanityam asukhaṁ lokam imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām [33]
kim punaḥ–Not to mention that; bhaktāḥ (santaḥ)–having become devoted to Me; puṇyāḥ–the pure; brāhmaṇāḥ–brāhmaṇs; tathā–and; rājarṣayaḥ–saintly kings; (parāṁ gatiṁ yānti)–will surely attain the supreme destination. prāpya–(Therefore) having achieved; imam–this; anityam–temporary; asukham–miserable; lokam–human body; bhajasva–serve; mām–Me. [33]
33 So can there be any doubt that those brāhmaṇs and saintly kings who are pure devotees will achieve the supreme goal? Therefore, worship Me, since although this human body is temporary and a place of suffering, it is attained only after many births and it affords the best opportunity to render devotional service to Me.
मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु ।मामेवैष्यसि युक्त्वैवमात्मानं मत्परायणः ॥३४॥
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskurumām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ [34]
bhava–Be; mat-manāḥ–always conscious of Me; mat-bhaktaḥ–My devoted servitor; mat-yājī (cha)–and My worshipper. namaskuru–Offer obeisances; mām–to Me. evam–In this way; yuktvā ātmānam–having dedicated yourself to Me; mat-parāyaṇaḥ–taking refuge in Me; eṣyasi–you will reach; mām eva–Me. [34]
34 Always think of Me, be my devotee, always worship Me and offer obeisances to Me. Thus offering yourself to Me and taking refuge in Me, you will come to Me.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे राजगुह्ययोगो नाम नवमोऽध्यायः ॥९॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde rāja-guhya-yogo nāma navamo ’dhyāyaḥ [9]
End of Chapter NineThe Hidden Treasure of Devotionfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
दशमोऽध्यायः
Chapter Ten Vibhūti-yoga The Divine Glories of the Lord
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
भूय एव महाबाहो शृणु मे परमं वचः ।यत्तेऽहं प्रीयमाणाय वक्ष्यामि हितकाम्यया ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
bhūya eva mahā-bāho śṛṇu me paramaṁ vachaḥyat te ’haṁ prīyamāṇāya vakṣyāmi hita-kāmyayā [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) mahā-bāho–O mighty-armed Arjuna; śṛṇu–hear; bhūyaḥ eva–once again; me–My; paramam–supreme; vachaḥ–word; yat–since; aham–I; vakṣyāmi–will speak; te prīyamāṇāya–to you, who are very dear to Me; hita-kāmyayā–desiring your welfare. [1]
1 The Supreme Lord said: O heroic Arjuna, listen to My supreme word once again. Desiring your welfare, I shall speak to you, who are very dear to Me.
न मे विदुः सुरगणाः प्रभवं न महर्षयः ।अहमादिर्हि देवानां महर्षीणाञ्च सर्व्वशः ॥२॥
na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥaham ādir hi devānāṁ maharṣīṇāñ cha sarvaśaḥ [2]
na–Neither; sura-gaṇāḥ–the demigods; na–nor; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ–the great sages; viduḥ–understand; me–My; prabhavam–transcendental birth; hi–because; sarvaśaḥ–in all respects; aham ādiḥ–I am the origin; devānām–of the demigods; mahā-ṛṣīṇām cha–and of the great sages, too. [2]
2 Neither the demigods nor the great sages can understand My transcendental appearance in this world, as I alone am the origin of those celestial beings and sages.
यो मामजमनादिञ्च वेत्ति लोकमहेश्वरम् ।असम्मूढः स मर्त्त्येषु सर्व्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते ॥३॥
yo mām ajam anādiñ cha vetti loka-maheśvaramasammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu sarva-pāpaiḥ pramuchyate [3]
yah–One who; vetti–knows; mām–Me, the son of Devakī; ajam–as the birthless; anādim–the beginningless; loka-mahā-īśvaram cha–and the Supreme Lord of all beings; saḥ–he; asammūḍhaḥ–undeluded; martyeṣu–among men; pramuchyate–is liberated; sarva-pāpaiḥ–from all sins or obstacles to devotion. [3]
3 One who knows Me, the son of Devakī, as the birthless, beginningless, Supreme Lord of all beings, is undeluded among men and completely liberated from sin.
बुद्धिर्ज्ञानमसम्मोहः क्षमा सत्यं दमः शमः ।सुखं दुःखं भवोऽभावो भयञ्चाभयमेव च ॥४॥
अहिंसा समता तुष्टिस्तपो दानं यशोऽयशः ।भवन्ति भावा भूतानां मत्त एव पृथग्विधाः ॥५॥
buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ kṣamā satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥsukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhavo ’bhāvo bhayañ chābhayam eva cha [4]
ahiṁsā samatā tuṣṭis tapo dānaṁ yaśo ’yaśaḥbhavanti bhāvā bhūtānāṁ matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ [5]
(ete)–All these; pṛthak-vidhāḥ bhāvāḥ–various qualities; bhūtānām–of the living beings; bhavanti–are born; mattaḥ eva–of Me alone: buddhiḥ–ability to determine subtle meanings; jñānam–ability to discriminate between spirit and matter; asammohaḥ–freedom from delusion; kṣamā–tolerance; satyam–truthfulness; damaḥ–control of the external senses; śamaḥ–control of the internal senses; sukham–happiness; duḥkham–unhappiness; bhavaḥ–birth; abhāvaḥ–death; bhayam cha–fear; abhayam eva cha–and fearlessness; ahiṁsā–nonviolence; samatā–equanimity, seeing the happiness and unhappiness of all beings as one’s own; tuṣṭiḥ–satisfaction; tapaḥ–austerity as directed in the Vedas; dānam–charity; yaśaḥ–fame; ayaśaḥ (cha)–and infamy. [4–5]
4–5 Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from delusion, forbearance, truthfulness, mental control, sense control, happiness, unhappiness, birth, death, fear, courage, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame, and infamy—all these various attributes of the living beings are born of Me alone.
महर्षयः सप्त पूर्व्वे चत्वारो मनवस्तथा ।मद्भावा मानसा जाता येषां लोक इमाः प्रजाः ॥६॥
maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve chatvāro manavas tathāmad-bhāvā mānasā jātā yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ [6]
(ete) mat-bhāvāḥ–All these personalities, empowered by Me; mānasāḥ jātāḥ–are born of My mind, which is manifest as Hiraṇyagarbha, Lord Brahmā: sapta mahāṛṣayaḥ–the seven great sages—Marīchi, Atri, Aṅgirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vaśiṣṭha; pūrve–and their predecessors; chatvārah–the four sages Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanat Kumār, and Sanātan, all known as brahmarṣis; tathā manavaḥ–and the fourteen Manus headed by Svayambhuva. imāḥ prajāḥ loke–Mankind—brāhmaṇ, etc., and all progeny; yeṣām–descends from these patriarchs. [6]
6 The seven great sages headed by Marīchi, and preceding them, the four brāhmaṇ sages headed by Sanaka, and also the fourteen Manus or progenitors headed by Svayambhuva—all are empowered by Me and are born of Lord Brahmā, who is a manifestation of My mind. Mankind and all progeny descends from these patriarchs.
एतां विभूतिं योगञ्च मम यो वेत्ति तत्त्वतः ।सोऽविकल्पेन योगेन युज्यते नात्र संशयः ॥७॥
etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogañ cha mama yo vetti tattvataḥso ’vikalpena yogena yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ [7]
yaḥ–One who; vetti–knows; tattvataḥ–in truth; etām–this; vibhūtim–supremacy; cha–and; yogam–(bhakti-) yoga; mama–of Mine; saḥ–such a person; yujyate–is linked; avikalpena–by undeviating; yogena–knowledge of essential truth. atra–In this matter; na saṁśayaḥ (asti)–there is no doubt. [7]
7 One who thus knows in truth My supremacy and devotional service serves Me in unwavering realisation. Of this there is no doubt.
अहं सर्व्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्व्वं प्रवर्त्तते ।इति मत्वा भजन्ते मां बुधा भावसमन्विताः ॥८॥
ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartateiti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ [8]
aham prabhavaḥ–I am the Supreme Absolute Truth, Svayam Bhagavān or the original Supreme Lord, the cause; sarvasya–of all causes, including Brahma, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. sarvam–All activity in the universe of matter and spirit, and the Vedas and allied scriptures; pravartate–arise; mattaḥ–from Me. matvā–Realising; iti–this deep truth; budhāḥ–persons of fine theistic intelligence; bhāva-samanvitāḥ–in their divine relationship of servitude, friendship, etc.; bhajante–worship, adore; mām–Me. [8]
8 I am Kṛṣṇa, the Sweet Absolute, the origin of all. The entire universe of material and transcendental play, activity, purpose, and the Vedas and allied scriptures which give guidance—all evolve from Me alone. Realising this hidden treasure, persons of fine theistic intelligence surpass the mundane and embrace the path of love divine, rāga-marg, and adore Me forever.
Commentary
Verses 8–11 are the four principal verses of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā. The ontological substance of the book is contained within these four essential verses beginning, “Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo: everything evolves from Me.”
In the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (1.2.11), the three main conceptions of the Absolute are given as Brahma, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. Brahma is the all-comprehensive aspect of the Absolute, Paramātmā is the all-permeating aspect of the Absolute, and Bhagavān is the personal conception of the Absolute. The word Bhagavān is generally defined as stated in the Viṣṇu-purāṇa (6.5.47):
ऐश्वर्य्यस्य समग्रस्य वीर्य्यस्य यशसः श्रियःज्ञानवैराग्ययोश्चैव षण्णां भग इतीङ्गना
aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥjñāna-vairāgyayoś chaiva ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itīṅganā
“He who is full with all the six opulences of wealth, power, fame, beauty, knowledge, and renunciation is known as Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord.”
The characteristic of Bhagavān, as Lord Nārāyaṇ, is that all kinds of potencies are personally controlled by Him. However, Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī has given a special and particularly fine interpretation: Bhagavān means bhajanīya guṇa-viśiṣṭa. His nature is such that whoever comes into contact with Him cannot resist serving Him. No one can resist feeling moved to worship and adore His charming personality. As Lord Kṛṣṇa, He attracts the love of everyone.
Therefore, by the word sarvasya, Lord Kṛṣṇa indicates, “I am Svayam Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord Himself. I am the origin of not only Brahma and Paramātmā. I am also the origin of the Master of all potencies who commands the respect of everyone, Lord Nārāyaṇ of Vaikuṇṭha.
“Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: every attempt and movement begins from Me, including the methods by which everyone worships and serves Me in devotion.”
नायमात्मा प्रवचनेन लभ्योन मेधया न बहुना श्रुतेन ।यमेवैष वृणुते तेन लभ्यस्तस्यैष आत्मा विवृणुते तनूं स्वाम् ॥
(कठोपनिषद् १.२.२३)
nāyam ātmā pravachanena labhyona medhayā na bahunā śrutenayam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyastasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām
(Kaṭhopaniṣad: 1.2.23)
“The Lord cannot by known by logic, intelligence, or extensive study of the scriptures. But He reveals Himself to one who is eager to serve Him and prays to Him for His grace.”
In this way, “Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: I am the first to reveal to the people, ‘Worship Me in this way.’ I appear as Guru, and through him, I worship Myself.”
In the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (11.17.27), the Guru is described by the Lord as His own direct manifestation:
आचार्य्यं मां विजानीयान्नावमन्येत कर्हिचित् ।न मर्त्त्य बुद्ध्यासूयेत सर्व्व देवमयो गुरुः ॥
āchāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhichitna martya buddhyāsūyeta sarva deva-mayo guruḥ
(Śrī Kṛṣṇa said to His devotee, Uddhava:) “You should know the bona fide spiritual master as My very Self. Gurudev is the embodiment of all the gods. Never dishonour him or find fault in him by ascribing any mundane conception of place, time, and circumstances to him.”
Furthermore, the Lord’s finest potency is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Of course, there are many other eternal associates, but the highest order of devotional service is represented in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The Lord is therefore saying, “My worship is shown by Me. I, as My finest potency, worship Myself. Iti matvā bhajante Mām: understanding this conception, the devotee will come to worship Me, always under the direction of My best worshipper—My finest potency and representation—Rādhārāṇī, or Gurudev. Crossing Her, the highest and most desirable form of service to Me is not possible.”
Rādhā-dāsyam, the servitorship of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, is indicated here. Only those who are blessed with divine intelligence will be able to appreciate this, and not persons with self-acquired intelligence from this māyika quarter, the world of misconception. In this verse, the word budhāḥ refers to sumedhasaḥ as described in the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (11.5.32), or persons of fine theistic intelligence arising from direct connection with the transcendental plane. The inner guidance and direction they receive is the outcome of sukṛti, divine merit acquired by the association of pure devotees. Bhāva-samanvitāḥ means rāga-samanvitāḥ—anurāga—love and attraction which is affinity, not by strictly following scriptural rules or drawn from any plane of loss and gain, but from bhāva, inner divine inspiration. Devotion of this high type is completely noncalculative (jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti), as described by Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī in his Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11):
अन्याभिलाषिता शून्यं ज्ञानकर्म्माद्यनावृतम् ।आनुकूल्येन कृष्णानुशीलनं भक्तिरुत्तमा ॥
anyābhilāṣitā śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy anāvṛtamānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā
“The highest devotion is that which satisfies Lord Kṛṣṇa, free from the coverings of any pursuits such as action and knowledge.”
The most rare and elevated stage of devotion is in the line of spontaneous devotion, known as rāga-mārg. In that line, guided by the qualified Guru, an elevated pure devotee may attain service to a leader of one of the groups of Kṛṣṇa’s personal associates who serve the Lord in His Pastimes in a relationship of friendship (sakhya-rasa), parenthood (vātsalya-rasa), or consorthood (madhura-rasa). In Vṛndāvan the Lord is served in spontaneous devotion by His friends headed by Subal Sakhā, and by His parental devotees headed by Nanda Mahārāj and mother Yaśodā. The gopīs headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā serve Him in consorthood. But amongst all His associates, and amongst all the gopīs, the highest order of divine loving service is rendered to the Lord by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Therefore, the acme of rāga-mārg is the service of Rādhārāṇī (Rādhā-dāsyam). This is the highest objective of the Rūpānuga Gauḍīya sampradāya, the followers of pure devotion as taught by Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī Prabhupād, in the line of Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu.
मच्चित्ता मद्गतप्राणा बोधयन्तः परस्परम् ।कथयन्तश्च मां नित्यं तुष्यन्ति च रमन्ति च ॥९॥
mach-chittā mad-gata-prāṇā bodhayantaḥ parasparamkathayantaś cha māṁ nityaṁ tuṣyanti cha ramanti cha [9]
mat-gata-prāṇāḥ–Those who have dedicated their lives to Me; mat-chittāḥ–who always think of Me; mām kathayantaḥ cha–and talk about Me; bodhayantaḥ parasparam (santaḥ)–enlightening one another with the nectar of their devotional realisations; nityam–are ever; tuṣyanti cha–satisfied; ramanti cha–and ecstatic. [9]
9 Always thinking of Me, those surrendered souls converse about Me, enlightening one another with the nectar of their devotional realisations, ever content and ecstatic in their divine natures.
Commentary
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa is speaking about His pure devotees. “I am in the heart of their hearts, in their every thought. Their entire energy—their whole life—is dedicated to My satisfaction. They converse with one another about Me and experience mutual enlightenment. They always love to talk about Me with whoever they meet, and nothing else. For every time, place, and circumstance, I am the only subject of their discussion. They find very much satisfaction in this (tuṣyanti cha).” Up to the divine relationship of parenthood, there is the feeling of satisfaction.
Furthermore, “Ramanti cha: just as a wife enjoys a conjugal relationship with her husband, the devotees similarly feel such ecstasy in My intimate company when speaking about Me.” This has also been mentioned by the previous Āchāryas.
तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतां प्रीतिपूर्व्वकम् ।ददामि बुद्धियोगं तं येन मामुपयान्ति ते ॥१०॥
teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakamdadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ yena mām upayānti te [10]
teṣām prīti-pūrvakam bhajatām–To those loving devotees; satata-yuktānām–who are always engaged in My service; (aham)–I; dadāmi–give; tam–that; buddhi-yogam–inspiration; yena–by which; te–they; upayānti–can come; mām–to Me. [10]
10 To those devotees who are always lovingly engaged in My service, I give the divine inspiration by which they can come to Me.
Commentary
The Lord says, “The highest group of My servitors (whose devotion was described in the previous verse by the word ramanti) are those who are constantly engaged (satata-yukta) in My service in consorthood (madhura-rasa) with heartfelt love (bhajatām prīti-pūrvakam).” Then He says that He will give them further inspiration or inner instruction ‘by which they can come to Him’ (yena Mām upayānti te). When already in this and the previous verse the devotees’ service to the Lord has been described as eternal (by the words nityam and satata-yukta), now the statement that He will give them further inspiration ‘by which they can come to Him’ may appear to be redundant. Therefore, in the expression Mām upayānti te (“They will come to Me”), the word upayānti must be defined as parakīya-bhāvena—upapati. Pati means husband, and upapati means paramour.
In Vṛndāvan, Lord Kṛṣṇa is not considered a lawful husband, but He is the Lord of the heart, transcendental to even the husband (parakīya-rasa). Deceiving their husbands, the gopīs of Vṛndāvan unite with Kṛṣṇa. they do not allow a second party to come between them and Kṛṣṇa. They cannot allow the interception of social law or even scriptural regulation, because Kṛṣṇa’s position is absolute, and such a relationship is more relishable to Him. This is Vṛndāvan-bhajan*, and this is the meaning of upapati.
* विक्रीडितं व्रजवधूभिरिदञ्च विष्णोःश्रद्धान्वितोऽनुशृणुयादय वर्णयेद्यः ।भक्तिं परां भगवति प्रतिलभ्य कामंहृद्रोगमाश्वपहिनोत्यचिरेण धीरः ॥
(भाः १०/३३/३९)
vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idañ cha viṣṇoḥśraddhānvito ’nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥbhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁhṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty achireṇa dhīraḥ
(SB: 10.33.39)
“A self-controlled person who possesses sincere faith in the divine Pastimes transcendentally enjoyed by Lord Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs (Rāsa-līlā), and who, having heard those divine Pastimes from the lotus mouth of the bona fide Guru constantly sings or narrates their glories—such a person swiftly achieves the most elevated form of pure devotion for the Lord, and is promptly able to ward off the heart disease of lust.”
In his writings, Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī has laid stress on the word dhīra, meaning ‘self-controlled.’ To hear these elevated subjects, one must enter into the culture of sense-control, otherwise he will be lost.
नैतत्समाचरेज्जातु मनसापि ह्यनीश्वरः ।विनश्यत्याचरन्मौढ्याद्यथारुद्रोऽब्धिजं विषम् ॥
(भाः १०/३३/३०)
naitat samācharej jātu manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥvinaśyaty ācharan mauḍhyād yathārudro ’bdhi-jaṁ viṣam
(SB: 10.33.30)
“No one should ever even think of imitating this behaviour of the Supreme Lord and the gopīs. If out of gross foolishness anyone tries to imitate the Pastimes of the Lord, he will be destroyed, as though imitating Lord Śiva by drinking the poison which arose from the ocean.” (It is described in the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam that once the demigods and the demons jointly engaged in churning the ocean to produce nectar. Both nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Śiva, by his power, could hold the poison within his throat.)
“My relationship with them is independent of everything conceivable, including law, society, and the scriptures. It is most innate and natural, and it does not require any social or scriptural sanction. I say to them, ‘You may show formal respect to all these restrictions and live in the society. But from the heart of your heart, you are Mine.’ This is the special inspiration and insight I give those devotees (buddhi-yogam yena Mām upayānti te).
“Externally there are social and scriptural demands, but My position is over and above them. Veda is My instruction for the benefit of the masses who have deviated from Me, and society is also under the jurisdiction of those general instructions given to the people by Me. But My divine relationship with everything is intrinsic and independent. It does not require recognition from anyone. Such a relationship is the highest. It is the constant. It supercedes all law and society which are guided by the Vedas; rather, all the Vedas are searching for such a thing.”
Śrutibhir vimṛgyām (SB: 10.47.61): viśeṣa-mṛgya—the Vedas are searching after this ideal divine position. In the section of the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam which deals with Rāsa-līlā, the Vedas are begging forgiveness.
“We are generally supposed to give tidings of You, but we could not describe You as we now experience You here. Now we understand that we have committed an offence, because we could not distribute this Rāsa-līlā to the world.”
Like signposts, all the revealed scriptures are only showing the direction; but where, how? “We don’t know.” Only, “He may be available in this direction.”
Anywhere and everywhere, everything belongs to Him. For one who knows this, all possibilities of sense pleasure and exploitation are uprooted. For example, an unmarried woman may have the possibility of being approached by many, but there is less possibility for those who are married, because they are possessed by someone. Similarly, when we are able to know that everything is only for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, then we shall realise that all our exploiting tendencies have vanished forever. Nothing will remain to be utilised for the pleasure of our sense-experience. It will be very deeply felt in our hearts that everything has its existence only for His satisfaction, and there is no room for any other exploitation.
We, too, are included there—our existence is also only for His satisfaction. Everything is meant for His divine Pastimes (līlā), and there is no possibility for any others’ pastimes. All are included in that one līlā. Encroachment will disappear when we learn the proper utility of everything. He is the owner, and His ownership is absolute. The scriptures, society, and law designate, “This is yours, that is another’s, or that belongs to a third party.” This is something like a temporary lease, but the permanent ownership is in all respects with Him. All others—possessor and property, master and servant—are relative, and only sanctioned by Him for the time being. He alone is the absolute owner, possessor, and enjoyer. Complete purification of our hearts is possible only when we arrive at such a conclusion. Everyone is thinking of themselves as many masters of many things, but this is all ‘heart disease’ (hṛd-rogam). This is all conceived in a diseased state of consciousness. In a healthy state, when the heart is quite wholesome, we can see the Supreme Whole, and we can see that everything is meant only for His satisfaction.
तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजं तमः ।नाशयाम्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भास्वता ॥११॥
teṣām evānukampārtham aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥnāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā [11]
anukampa-artham–Out of compassion; teṣām eva–for them; aham–I; ātma-bhāva-sthaḥ–appearing within their hearts; nāśayāmi–destroy; bhāsvatā jñāna-dīpena–with the shining lamp of knowledge; tamaḥ–the darkness; ajñāna-jam–born of ignorance. [11]
11 Out of compassion for them, I, situated within the hearts of all living beings, dispel the darkness of ignorance with the radiance of knowledge.
or
11 Being conquered by the love of those devotees who in their unalloyed loving devotion become afflicted by the all-devouring darkness born of their pangs of separation from Me, I illuminate their hearts with My presence, destroying the darkness of their pain of separation.
Commentary
Of the two translations given above, the first is the most general interpretation of this verse. But if we appreciate pure, noncalculative devotion (jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti), the Lord’s statement here may again appear redundant and inconsistent.
When those high devotees are already admitted to be performing continuous and unadulterated service, and even above that, they are situated in the plane of pure love, spontaneous and automatic (rāga-mārg), how can it be harmonised that the Lord will now in the last stage destroy their ignorance (tamaḥ) born of misunderstanding (ajñāna-jam), by giving them knowledge (jñāna)? Jñān is only a cover—a futile, finite conception of the infinite Absolute (jñāna-karmādy anāvṛtam … bhaktir uttamā). When they have achieved devotion devoid of the covering of knowledge (jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti), how will they again have to return to that knowledge (jñāna)? In his commentary, Śrīla Viśvanāth Chakravartī Ṭhākur has mentioned that this knowledge is extraordinary (vilakṣaṇam), though he did not enter into specific detail. To clarify this point, we have given the following explanation:
Lamentation and delusion are generally known to be symptoms of the mode of ignorance (tamo-guṇa). In jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti, the elevated devotees who take Kṛṣṇa not as the Supreme God, but as a friend, son, husband, or lover, will come to experience lamentation and delusion, but this is only an outward appearance of ignorance. In fact, it is the pain of divine separation. They lament. “Where have You gone?”
In this verse, the Lord’s statement, teṣām evānukampārtham generally means “Fortunately for them,” or, “To favour them (I dispel their darkness, etc.).” But it may also be interpreted, “I want their favour. I aspire for the favour of those devotees of the highest order.”
The Lord also says to the Gopīs in the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (10.82.44):
मयि भक्तिर्हि भूतानाममृतत्वाय कल्पते ।दिष्ट्या यदासीन्मत्स्नेहो भवतीनां मदापनः ॥
mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām amṛtatvāya kalpatediṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ
“In general, people want devotion to Me to achieve eternal life. To cross the limit of mortality and to have eternal life, they come to Me and worship Me. For these reasons they want My service, but fortunately for you, O gopīs, you have some natural affection towards Me. That will ultimately bring you to Me.”
This is the general meaning. However, in Śrī Chaitanya-charitāmṛta, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadās Kavirāj Goswāmī has drawn out the inner meaning of what Kṛṣṇa is saying to the gopīs, which is just the opposite:
“Through devotion, everyone wants Me to help them attain the highest position of eternal benefit, and if they have a connection with Me, they consider themselves fortunate. But I consider Myself fortunate because I have come in touch with the valuable affection that I found in your hearts. By My fortune, I have got your association.”
Therefore, here in Śrī Gītā, the Lord is saying, “Teṣām evānukampārtham: being conquered by the love of those unalloyed devotees, when I cannot tolerate their pain of separation, I at once come running to satisfy them, and I reveal to them with special light, special consciousness, ‘I have returned to you—see Me now.’ With powerful brilliance (jñāna-dīpena) I show them My presence when they are very much in need of Me, and I relieve their pain of separation.”
Ātma-bhāva-sthaḥ: He reveals Himself according to His devotee’s divine relationship with Him (rasa): to a friend, as a friend; to a mother, as a child; to a wife, as a husband; and to the sweethearts, as a paramour.
After Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu left home and accepted the renounced order of life, sannyās, Mother Śachī could not tolerate the deep separation, and she began to cry. Śachī Devī was preparing excellent dishes, offering them to the Deity, and weeping. “Where is my Nimāi? He’s very fond of these curries—His favourite dishes, and Nimāi is not here.” Suddenly, Lord Chaitanya came and began to eat. Śachī Devī exclaimed, “Oh, Nimāi is eating!” and for the time being her separation was relieved. Moments later, she reconsidered, “Did I see Nimāi eating? But He is now a sannyāsī in Jagannāth Purī, so how could He have come here? Did I serve Him? There must be a mistake.” Then she examined the pots again to see if there was food there. Finding them empty, she began to conjecture whether even a dog or some other animal had come and eaten it. But during that moment, Nimāi had actually come, and Mother Śachī saw Him in broad daylight. That illumination is transcendental, and not the ‘knowledge’ (jñān) that is generally known in our vocabulary.
The acme of theism is parakīya-rasa. Parakīya means ‘another’s.’ In every divine relationship, the Lord captures all. In the whole of Vṛndāvan where everyone follows the path of love (rāga-mārg), this parakīya-rasa is infused. The friends of Kṛṣṇa sometimes say, “Some people say that Kṛṣṇa is a resident of Mathurā. They say He’s the son of Vasudev, and He will soon go to Mathurā. They say He is not our friend! Will we really lose His company? Then how will we be able to live in this jungle and herd the cows?” They experience this apprehension—“We may lose Him at any time.” This intensifies their friendly service to Him.
Similarly, Mother Yaśodā thinks, “Some say that Kṛṣṇa is not my son, He’s Devakī’s son. What is this? I won’t admit this. He’s my child!” This idea enhances Yaśodā’s affection for Kṛṣṇa: “I may lose Him? Then how shall I live?” Therefore, the parakīya-rasa stresses the rarity of Kṛṣṇa’s relationship, because the possibility of losing His company is always in the background. But the highest intensity of service is to be found in the madhura-rasa (consorthood) group. In the other rasas, there is the idea of suspense that He may ‘go away,’ but in the consorthood relationship in the divine abode of Vṛndāvan, the consorts cross the direction of the scriptures and the society, which guide everyone to remain as husband and wife (svakīya). Parakīya (‘another’s’) has been accepted in the science of devotion as the highest conception, above the socially and scripturally sanctioned svakīya (‘one’s own’).
Parakīya or paramour relationship nourishes the Pastimes of Kṛṣṇa by deceiving one who claims ownership over another, such as a husband over a wife, or a parent over a child. The normally accepted relationship of svakīya is commonplace, but to cross the jurisdiction of the scriptures and society, as a paramour, means a greater risk as if to commit sin. Thus, this relationship is very rare, and rarity enhances its intensity and value. The idea of deceiving the ‘possessor’ to favour the ‘non-possessor’ (in the spiritual sense) is a beautiful, ornamental conception. Actually, in Kṛṣṇa’s case there cannot be any state of paramourship, because in truth He is the owner of everything. However, the divine arrangement is fashioned in this way to enhance the devotee’s internal devotion for the Lord, just as food appears more tasteful when hunger is present.
In Vaikuṇṭha, the nature of the worship of Lord Viṣṇu is gorgeous, majestic, reverential, and awe-inspiring. But above that, in the highest conception, Godhead is humanlike in form and nature. It is stated in Śrī Chaitanya-charitāmṛta in the teachings to Sanātana Goswāmī:
কৃষ্ণের যতেক খেলা,	সর্ব্বোত্তম নরলীলা,	নরবপু তাহার স্বরূপ ।গোপবেশ, বেণুকর,	নবকিশোর, নটবর,	নরলীলা হয় অনুরূপ॥
কৃষ্ণের মধুর রূপ শুন সনাতন ।যে রূপের এক কণ,	ডুবায় সব ত্রিভুবন,	সর্ব্বপ্রাণী করে আকর্ষণ ॥
kṛṣṇera yateka khelā,	sarvvottama nara-līlā,	nara-vapu tāhāra svarūpagopa-veśa, veṇu-kara,	nava-kiśora, naṭavara,	nara-līlā haya anurūpa
kṛṣṇera madhura-rūpa śuna sanātanaye rūpera eka kaṇa,	ḍubāya saba tribhuvana,	sarvva-prāṇī kare ākarṣaṇa
“The highest form of Godhead is Kṛṣṇa, who plays in His eternal divine Pastimes like a human being. An ever-youthful cowherd boy of Vṛndāvan, the best of dancers, He enjoys His Pastimes, always playing His flute. His beauty is so charming and sweet that the whole universe is flooded by even the tiniest atom of it, and all beings are attracted irresistibly to Him.”
He is approachable by all. We can find God nearest of all—in a human feature. It has been explained how Kṛṣṇa’s form of human feature is the highest form of the Absolute, according to the calculation of ecstasy (rasa), which is the common standard of measurement of the whole scope of the Infinite. By the development of śānta-, dāsya-, sakhya-, vātsalya-, and madhura-, and then parakīya-rasa (tranquillity, servitude, friendship, parenthood, consorthood, and then paramour relationship), this is scientifically proven, without whimsical or blind faith. If we follow the line of Rūpānuga-bhajan (devotion following the line of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī) which originates from Śrī Chaitanyadev, this scientific basis can be appreciated. The previous Āchāryas have left comprehensive teachings for us on how to follow, conceive, and attain all these things.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान् ।पुरुषं शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम् ॥१२॥
आहुस्त्वामृषयः सर्व्वे देवर्षिर्नारदस्तथा ।असितो देवलो व्यासः स्वयञ्चैव ब्रवीषि मे ॥१३॥
arjuna uvācha
paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavānpuruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum [12]
āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve devarṣir nāradas tathāasito devalo vyāsaḥ svayañ chaiva bravīṣi me [13]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (ahaṁ manye)–I accept; bhavān–Your grace; param brahma–as the Supreme Brahma, directly the Supreme Lord; param dhāma–the supreme Śyāmasundar form, the supreme refuge; paramam–the supreme; pavitram–sanctifier, saviour. sarve–All; ṛṣayaḥ–the sages; deva-ṛṣiḥ nāradaḥ–Nārad Muni, the saint among the gods; asitaḥ–Asita; devalaḥ–Devala; tathā vyāsaḥ–and the great sage Vyās; āhuḥ–call; tvām–You; śāśvatam puruṣam–the eternal personality; divyam–the self-manifest; ādi-devam–the original Lord; ajam–the birthless; vibhum–the all-pervading Lord, the fountain-head of all opulences; cha svayam eva–and You, Yourself; bravīṣi me–are now declaring this to me. [12–13]
12–13 Arjuna said: O Lord, You are the supreme Brahma, the supreme shelter, and the supreme saviour. All the prominent sages such as Devarṣi Nārad, Asita, Devala, and Vyās have described You as the self-manifest, eternal Supreme Person, the fountainhead of all opulences and the root of all existence from whose divine play everything emanates. And now You are personally declaring this to be the truth.
सर्व्वमेतदृतं मन्ये यन्मां वदसि केशव ।न हि ते भगवन्व्यक्तिं विदुर्देवा न दानवाः ॥१४॥
sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye yan māṁ vadasi keśavana hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ vidur devā na dānavāḥ [14]
(he) keśava–O Keśava; (aham) manye–I accept; ṛtam–as factual; sarvam etat–all; yat vadasi–You have told; mām–me. (he) bhagavan–O Lord; hi–indeed; na devāḥ na dānavāḥ–neither the demigods nor the demons; viduḥ–know; te–Your; vyaktim–personality in full. [14]
14 O Keśava, I fully accept all that You have said. O Lord, indeed neither demigods nor demons know Your personality in full.
स्वयमेवात्मनात्मानं वेत्थ त्वं पुरुषोत्तम ।भूतभावन भूतेश देवदेव जगत्पते ॥१५॥
svayam evātmanātmānaṁ vettha tvaṁ puruṣottamabhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa deva-deva jagat-pate [15]
(he) puruṣottama–O Supreme Person; (he) bhūta-bhāvana–O universal father; (he) bhūta-īśa–O Lord of all beings; (he) deva-deva–O God of the gods; (he) jagat-pate–O Jagannāth, Lord of the universe; eva–only; tvam–You; svayam–Yourself; vettha–know; ātmānam–Yourself; ātmanā–by Yourself—by Your own potency. [15]
15 O Supreme Person, universal father, Lord of all beings, God of the gods, Lord of the universe! Only You can know Yourself, by Your own divine potency.
वक्तुमर्हस्यशेषेण दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः ।याभिर्विभूतिभिर्लोकानिमांस्त्वं व्याप्य तिष्ठसि ॥१६॥
vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥyābhir vibhūtibhir lokān imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi [16]
hi (tvam) vaktum arhasi–You may kindly describe; aśeṣeṇa–elaborately; (tāḥ)–those; divyāḥ–divine; ātma-vibhūtayaḥ–personal opulences; yābhiḥ vibhūtibhiḥ–by which opulences; tvam–You; tiṣṭhasi–are present; vyāpya–pervading; imān lokān–all these worlds. [16]
16 Please describe to me in full Your personal opulences by which You pervade all these worlds.
कथं विद्यामहं योगिंस्त्वां सदा परिचिन्तयन् ।केषु केषु च भावेषु चिन्त्योऽसि भगवन्मया ॥१७॥
kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs tvāṁ sadā parichintayankeṣu keṣu cha bhāveṣu chintyo ’si bhagavan mayā [17]
(he) yogin–O Lord of yogamāyā, Lord of divine potency; (he) bhagavan–O Supreme Lord; katham–how can; aham–I; sadā–be constantly; parichintayan–absorbed in thought; tvām–of You; vidyām–know; (tvām)–You; cha–and; keṣu keṣu bhāveṣu–in which forms; asi–are; (tvam)–You; chintyaḥ–to be thought of; mayā–by me? [17]
17 O Lord of divine potency, how can I be constantly absorbed in thought of You, how can I know You, and in which forms should I think of You?
विस्तरेणात्मनो योगं विभूतिञ्च जनार्द्दन ।भूयः कथय तृप्तिर्हि शृण्वतो नास्ति मेऽमृतम् ॥१८॥
vistareṇātmano yogaṁ vibhūtiñ cha janārdanabhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam [18]
(he) janārdana–O Janārdan; kathaya–please describe; bhūyaḥ–again; vistareṇa–in detail; ātmanaḥ yogam–the process of devotional union with You (bhakti-yoga); vibhūtim cha–and Your opulences; hi–since; śṛṇvataḥ–hearing; amṛtam–Your ambrosial words; me–my; tṛptiḥ–satiation; na asti–does not occur. [18]
18 O Janārdan, please again describe in detail Your opulences and the path of devotion to You, for I never tire of hearing Your ambrosial words.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः ।प्राधान्यतः कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे ॥१९॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
hanta te kathayiṣyāmi divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥprādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha nāsty anto vistarasya me [19]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: hanta kuru-śreṣṭha–O best of the Kurus; kathayiṣyāmi–I will tell; te–you; prādhānyataḥ–the principal; divyāḥ–transcendental; ātma-vibhūtayaḥ–personal opulences, manifest by My divine potency; hi–since; na asti–there is no; antaḥ–end; vistarasya me–to the expanse of My glories. [19]
19 The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, best of the Kurus, My glories are unlimited, so I shall tell you of My principal transcendental opulences, manifest in this world by My divine potency.
अहमात्मा गुडाकेश सर्व्वभूताशयस्थितः ।अहमादिश्च मध्यञ्च भूतानामन्त एव च ॥२०॥
aham ātmā guḍākeśa sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥaham ādiś cha madhyañ cha bhūtānām anta eva cha [20]
(he) guḍākeśa–O Arjuna; aham ātmā–I am the Supersoul; sarva-bhūta-āśaya-sthitaḥ–situated within the heart of all beings; cha eva–and; aham ādiḥ–I am the beginning; madhyam cha–middle; antaḥ cha–and end; bhūtānām–of all beings. [20]
20 O conqueror of sleep, I am the Supersoul within the hearts of all beings, and I am their beginning, middle, and end.
आदित्यानामहं विष्णुर्ज्योतिषां रविरंशुमान् ।मरीचिर्मरुतामस्मि नक्षत्राणामहं शशी ॥२१॥
ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumānmarīchir marutām asmi nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī [21]
ādityānām–Of the twelve Ādityas; aham asmi viṣṇuḥ–I am the Āditya known as Viṣṇu. jyotiṣām–Of the luminaries; aham (asmi)–I am; aṁśumān–the blazing; raviḥ–sun; marutām–Of the Vāyu demigods; marīchiḥ–(I am) the Vāyu known as Marīchi; nakṣatrāṇām–and of the stars; śaśī–(I am) the moon. [21]
21 Of the twelve Ādityas I am Viṣṇu; of the luminaries I am the radiant sun; of the Vāyus I am Marīchi, of stars I am the moon.
वेदानां सामवेदोऽस्मि देवानामस्मि वासवः ।इन्द्रियाणां मनश्चास्मि भूतानामस्मि चेतना ॥२२॥
vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ’smi devānām asmi vāsavaḥindriyāṇāṁ manaś chāsmi bhūtānām asmi chetanā [22]
vedānām–Of the Vedas; (aham) asmi–I am; sāma-vedaḥ–the Sāma-veda. devānām–Of the demigods; (aham) asmi–I am; vāsavaḥ–Indra. indriyāṇām–Of the senses; (aham) asmi–I am; manaḥ–the mind; cha–and; (aham) asmi–I am; chetanā–the life; bhūtānām–of all that lives. [22]
22 Of the Vedas, I am Sāma-veda; of the demigods I am Indra; of the senses I am the mind, and I am the life of all that lives.
रुद्राणां शंकरश्चास्मि वित्तेशो यक्षरक्षसाम् ।वसूनां पावकश्चास्मि मेरुः शिखरिणामहम् ॥२३॥
rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś chāsmi vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasāmvasūnāṁ pāvakaś chāsmi meruḥ śikhariṇām aham [23]
rudrāṇām–Of the eleven Rudras; aham asmi–I am; śaṅkaraḥ–Śiva; cha–and; yakṣa-rakṣasām–of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; (aham) asmi–I am; vitta-īśaḥ–Kubera. vasūnām–Of the eight Vasus; pāvakaḥ–(I am) Agni; cha–and; śikhariṇām–of the mountains; meruḥ–(I am) Sumeru. [23]
23 Of the eleven Rudras I am Śaṅkar, and of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas I am Kubera. Of the eight Vasus I am Agni, and of mountains I am Sumeru.
पुरोधसाञ्च मुख्यं मां विद्धि पार्थ बृहस्पतिम् ।सेनानीनामहं स्कन्दः सरसामस्मि सागरः ॥२४॥
purodhasāñ cha mukhyaṁ māṁ viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatimsenānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ [24]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; viddhi–know; mām–Me; bṛhaspatim–as Bṛhaspati; mukhyam purodhasām–the chief among priests engaged in sacrifice. senānīnām–Of generals; aham asmi–I am; skandaḥ–Kārtikeya; cha–and; sarasām–among reservoirs; sāgaraḥ–(I am) the ocean. [24]
24 O Pārtha, you should know Me as the chief of priests, Bṛhaspati; of generals I am Kārtikeya, and of reservoirs I am the ocean.
महर्षीणां भृगुरहं गिरामस्म्येकमक्षरम् ।यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालयः ॥२५॥
maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ girām asmy ekam akṣaramyajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ [25]
mahā-ṛṣīnām–Of great sages; aham asmi–I am; bhṛguḥ–Bhṛgu. girām–Of sound vibrations; (aham) asmi–I am; ekam akṣaram–the praṇava monosyllable, Oṁkār. yajñānām–Of all types of sacrifices; (aham) asmi–I am; japa-yajñaḥ–sacrifice in the form of meditative chanting of the holy names; (cha)–and; sthāvarāṇām–of the immovable; himālayaḥ–(I am) the Himālayas. [25]
25 Of great sages, I am Bhṛgu; of sound vibrations, I am Om; of all sacrifices, I am the chanting of the Holy Names; and of the immovable, I am the Himālayas.
अश्वत्थः सर्व्ववृक्षाणां देवर्षीणाञ्च नारदः ।गन्धर्व्वाणां चित्ररथः सिद्धानां कपिलो मुनिः ॥२६॥
aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ devarṣīṇāñ cha nāradaḥgandharvāṇāṁ chitrarathaḥ siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ [26]
sarva-vṛkṣāṇām–Of all trees; aśvatthaḥ–(I am) the Aśvattha tree; deva-ṛṣīṇām–of godly sages; nāradaḥ–(I am) Nārad Muni. gandharvāṇām–Of Gandharvas; chitrarathaḥ–(I am) Chitraratha; cha–and; siddhānām–of perfected beings; kapilaḥ muniḥ–(I am) the sage Kapila. [26]
26 I am the Aśvattha among trees, Nārad of godly sages, Chitraratha of heavenly singers, and Kapila Muni of perfected beings.
उच्चैःश्रवसमश्वानां विद्धि माममृतोद्भवम् ।ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां नराणाञ्च नराधिपम् ॥२७॥
uchchaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ viddhi mām amṛtodbhavamairāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ narāṇāñ cha narādhipam [27]
aśvānām–Of horses; viddhi–know; mām uchchaiḥ-śravasam–Me as Uchchaiḥśravā; amṛta-udbhavam–who was born of the churning of nectar; gaja-indrāṇām–Of elephants; airāvatam–(I am) Airāvata; cha–and; narāṇām–among men; nara-adhipam–(I am) the king. [27]
27 Among horses know Me as Uchchaiḥśravā, who was born of nectar; know Me as Airāvata among elephants, and king among men.
आयुधानामहं वज्रं धेनूनामस्मि कामधुक् ।प्रजनश्चास्मि कन्दर्पः सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकिः ॥२८॥
āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ dhenūnām asmi kāmadhukprajanaś chāsmi kandarpaḥ sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ [28]
āyudhānām–Of weapons; aham asmi–I am; vajram–the thunderbolt, the weapon of Lord Indra. dhenūnām–Of cows; (aham) asmi–I am; kāma-dhuk–the desire-fulfilling cow. (kandarpāṇām)–Of cupids; (aham) asmi–I am; prajanaḥ–the progenitor; kandarpaḥ–Cupid; cha–and; sarpāṇām–of single-headed venomous snakes; vāsukiḥ–(I am) Vāsuki, the king of snakes. [28]
28 Of weapons I am the thunderbolt, and of cows I am the heavenly desire-fulfilling cow. Of cupids I am the progenitor, and of one-headed venomous snakes I am Vāsuki, the king of snakes.
अनन्तश्चास्मि नागानां वरुणो यादसामहम् ।पितॄणामर्य्यमा चास्मि यमः संयमतामहम् ॥२९॥
anantaś chāsmi nāgānāṁ varuṇo yādasām ahampitṝṇām aryamā chāsmi yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham [29]
nāgānām–Of the multi-headed non-poisonous serpents; aham asmi–I am; anantaḥ–the divine serpent Ananta; cha–and; yādasām–of aquatics; aham asmi–I am; varuṇaḥ–Varuṇadev. pitṝṇām–Of the deified ancestors; aryamā–(I am) Aryamā; cha–and; saṁyamatām–among chastisers; yamaḥ–Yamarāja. [29]
29 Of the multi-headed non-poisonous serpents I am the Ananta Nāga, and of aquatics I am Varuṇadev. Of the deified ancestors I am Aryamā, and of ministers I am Yamarāj, the lord of punishment.
प्रह्लादश्चास्मि दैत्यानां कालः कलयतामहम् ।मृगाणाञ्च मृगेन्द्रोऽहं वैनतेयश्च पक्षिणाम् ॥३०॥
prahlādaś chāsmi daityānāṁ kālaḥ kalayatām ahammṛgāṇāñ cha mṛgendro ’haṁ vainateyaś cha pakṣiṇām [30]
daityānām–Of the descendents of Diti; aham asmi–I am; prahlādaḥ–Prahlād; kalayatām cha–and of subduers; aham (asmi)–I am; kālaḥ–time; cha–and; mṛgāṇām–of animals; mṛga-indraḥ–the lion; cha–and; pakṣiṇām–of birds; vainateyaḥ–Garuḍa. [30]
30 Of the Daityas I am Prahlād, and of subjugators I am time. Of animals I am the lion, and of birds I am Garuḍa.
पवनः पवतामस्मि रामः शस्त्रभृतामहम् ।झषाणां मकरश्चास्मि स्रोतसामस्मि जाह्नवी ॥३१॥
pavanaḥ pavatām asmi rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām ahamjhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś chāsmi srotasām asmi jāhnavī [31]
pavatām–Of sanctifiers or of the rapid; aham asmi–I am; pavanaḥ–wind. śastra-bhṛtām–Of weapon-wielding heroes; (aham) asmi–I am; rāmaḥ–Lord Paraśurām. jhaṣāṇām–Among fish; (aham) asmi–I am; makaraḥ–the shark; cha–and; srotasām–of rivers; jāhnavī–(I am) the Jāhnavī, the Ganges. [31]
31 Of sanctifiers I am the wind; of weapon-wielding heros I am Lord Paraśurām; among fish I am the shark, and of rivers I am the Ganges.
सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च मध्यञ्चैवाहमर्ज्जुन ।अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वादः प्रवदतामहम् ॥३२॥
sargāṇām ādir antaś cha madhyañ chaivāham arjunaadhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ vādaḥ pravadatām aham [32]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; sargāṇām–of the manifest; aham eva ādiḥ–I am the beginning; antaḥ–end; madhyam cha–and middle. vidyānām–Of knowledge; adhyātma-vidyā–(I am) self-knowledge; cha–and; aham vādaḥ–I am the philosophy; pravadatām–of philosophers. [32]
32 O Arjuna, of all that is manifest I am the beginning, middle, and end. Of all wisdom I am self-knowledge, and I am the philosophy of philosophers.
अक्षराणामकारोऽस्मि द्वन्द्वः सामासिकस्य च ।अहमेवाक्षयः कालो धाताहं विश्वतोमुखः ॥३३॥
akṣarāṇām akāro ’smi dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya chaaham evākṣayaḥ kālo dhātāhaṁ viśvato-mukhaḥ [33]
akṣarāṇām–Of letters; aham asmi–I am; a-kāraḥ–the letter ‘a’; cha–and; sāmāsikasya–of compound words; dvandvaḥ–(I am) the dual compound word. aham eva akṣayaḥ kālaḥ–I alone am the eternal time flow; (sraṣṭṛām cha)–and of creators; viśvataḥ mukhaḥ–four-headed; dhātā–Lord Brahmā. [33]
33 Of the primary letters of the alphabet I am the letter ‘a’, and of compound words I am the dual. I alone am the endless flow of time, and of universal creators I am the four-headed Lord Brahmā.
मृत्युः सर्व्वहरश्चाहमुद्भवश्च भविष्यताम् ।कीर्त्तिः श्रीर्वाक्च नारीणां स्मृतिर्मेधा धृतिः क्षमा ॥३४॥
mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś chāham udbhavaś cha bhaviṣyatāmkīrtiḥ śrīr vāk cha nārīṇāṁ smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā [34]
(haraṇa-kāriṇām)–Of plunderers; aham mṛtyuḥ–I am death; sarva-haraḥ–the vanquisher of all; cha–and; bhaviṣyatām–of the predestined six transformations of the living beings; udbhavaḥ–(I am) the first, as birth; cha–and; nārīṇām–of feminine qualities; kīrtiḥ–fame; śrīḥ–beauty; vāk–perfect speech; smṛtiḥ–rememberance; medhā–intelligence (regarding scriptural wisdom); dhṛtiḥ–patience; cha–and; kṣamā–forgiveness (or the seven wives of Dharma). [34]
34 Of plunderers I am all-devouring death, and of the predestined six transformations I am birth, the foremost. Of the feminine qualities I am fame, beauty, perfect speech, remembrance, intelligence, patience, and forgiveness—the seven wives of Dharma.
बृहत्साम तथा साम्नां गायत्री छन्दसामहम् ।मासानां मार्गशीर्षोऽहमृतूनां कुसुमाकरः ॥३५॥
bṛhat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ gāyatrī chhandasām ahammāsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham ṛtūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ [35]
sāmnām–Of all the mantras in the Sāma-veda; bṛhat-sāma–(I am) the mantra prayer to Lord Indra; tathā–and; chhandasām–of metrical mantras; aham gāyatrī–I am the gāyatrī mantra. māsānām–Of the months; aham mārga-śīrṣaḥ–I am the month Agrahāyaṇ, the month of harvest (mid-November to mid-December). (cha)–And; ṛtūnām–of the seasons; kusuma-ākaraḥ–(I am) spring. [35]
35 Of all the mantras in the Sāma-veda I am the Bṛhatsāma prayer to Lord Indra, and of metrical mantras I am the holy gāyatrī mantra. Of the months I am the foremost, Agrahāyaṇ, and of the seasons I am flowerbearing spring.
द्यूतं छलयतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् ।जयोऽस्मि व्यवसायोऽस्मि सत्त्वं सत्त्ववतामहम् ॥३६॥
dyūtaṁ chhalayatām asmi tejas tejasvinām ahamjayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham [36]
chhalayatām–Of cheats; aham asmi–I am; dyūtam–gambling. tejasvinām–Of the splendid; aham asmi–I am; tejaḥ–splendour. asmi–(I) am; jayaḥ–victory; vyavasāyaḥ–perseverance; (cha)–and; sattvam–the power of truth; sattva-vatām–of the truthful. [36]
36 I am the gambling of cheats, and the glory of the glorious. I am victory, I am perseverance, and I am the power of truth of the honest.
वृष्णीनां वासुदेवोऽस्मि पाण्डवानां धनञ्जयः ।मुनीनामप्यहं व्यासः कवीनामुशनाः कविः ॥३७॥
vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañjayaḥmunīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ kavīnām uśanāḥ kaviḥ [37]
vṛṣṇīnām–Of the Yādavas; aham asmi–I am; vāsudevaḥ–Vāsudev; pāṇḍavānām–of the Pāṇḍavas; dhanañjayaḥ–Arjuna; munīnām–of the sages; vyāsaḥ–Vyāsadev; api–and; kavīnām–of knowers of the scriptures; uśanāḥ kaviḥ–Paṇḍit Śukrāchārya. [37]
37 Of the Yādavas I am Vāsudev, of the Pāṇḍavas I am Arjuna, of the sages I am Vyāsadev, and of knowers of the scriptures I am Śukrāchārya.
दण्डो दमयतामस्मि नीतिरस्मि जिगीषताम् ।मौनं चैवास्मि गुह्यानां ज्ञानं ज्ञानवतामहम् ॥३८॥
daṇḍo damayatām asmi nītir asmi jigīṣatāmmaunaṁ chaivāsmi guhyānāṁ jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham [38]
damayatām–Of law enforcers; aham asmi–I am; daṇḍaḥ–punishment. jigīṣatām–Of those desiring to conquer; (aham) asmi–I am; nītiḥ–political wisdom. guhyānām–Of all secrets; (aham) asmi–I am; maunam–silence; cha–and; jñāna-vatām–of the learned; jñānam eva–(I am) knowledge. [38]
38 I am the punishment meted out by the enforcers of the law, I am the political wisdom of those desiring to conquer. I am the silence of all secrets, I am the wisdom of the wise.
यच्चापि सर्व्वभूतानां बीजं तदहमर्ज्जुन ।न तदस्ति विना यत्स्यान्मया भूतं चराचरम् ॥३९॥
yach chāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ bījaṁ tad aham arjunana tad asti vinā yat syān mayā bhūtaṁ charācharam [39]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; cha–and; yat–whatever is; bījam–the seed; sarva-bhūtānām–of all beings; aham tat api–I am that. yat tat syāt–Whatever may exist; chara-acharam–moving and stationary; na asti–there is no; bhūtam–existence; mayā vinā–without Me. [39]
39 O Arjuna, whatever is considered the origin of all beings, I am that. Nothing, whether stationary or moving, can exist without Me.
नान्तोऽस्ति मम दिव्यानां विभूतीनां परन्तप ।एष तूद्देशतः प्रोक्तो विभूतेर्विस्तरो मया ॥४०॥
nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ vibhūtīnāṁ parantapaeṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto vibhūter vistaro mayā [40]
(he) parantapa–O chastiser of the enemy; na asti–there is no; antaḥ–end; mama divyānām vibhūtīnām–of My divine opulences; eṣaḥ tu–so; uddeśataḥ–an indication; vistaraḥ–of the expanse; vibhūteḥ–of these opulences; proktaḥ–has been mentioned; mayā–by Me. [40]
40 O conqueror of the enemy, My divine glories have no end. I have given you but an indication of them.
यद्यद्विभूतिमत्सत्त्वं श्रीमदूर्ज्जितमेव वा ।तत्तदेवावगच्छ त्वं मम तेजोंऽशसम्भवम् ॥४१॥
yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ śrīmad ūrjitam eva vātat tad evāvagachchha tvaṁ mama tejo ’ṁśa-sambhavam [41]
yat yat eva–Of each and every; vibhūtimat–magnificent; śrīmat–beautiful; vā–or; ūrjitam–glorious; sattvam–existence; tvam–you; ava-gachchha eva–should know; tat tat–each of them; aṁśa-sambhavam–as born of a portion; mama tejaḥ–of My power. [41]
41 Know for certain that whatever is magnificent, beautiful or glorious is born of but a fraction of My power.
अथवा बहुनैतेन किं ज्ञातेन तवार्ज्जुन ।विष्टभ्याहमिदं कृत्स्नमेकांशेन स्थितो जगत् ॥४२॥
athavā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjunaviṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam ekāṁśena sthito jagat [42]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; athavā–however; tava kim–what is your need; jñātena–of knowing; etena–this; bahunā–elaborately? viṣṭabhya–Supporting; idam–this; kṛtsnam–entire; jagat–universe; aham sthitaḥ–I am situated; eka-aṁśena–in My fractional expansion as the Supersoul of material nature—Mahāviṣṇu or Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu. [42]
42 But, O Arjuna, what is the need of elaborating further on My opulences? I support this entire universe in My fractional expansion as the Supersoul of material nature.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे विभूतियोगो नाम दशमोऽध्यायः ॥१०॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvādevibhūti-yogo nāma daśamo ’dhyāyaḥ [10]
End of Chapter TenThe Divine Glories of the Lordfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
एकादशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Eleven Viśva-rūpa-darśana-yoga The Vision of the Universal Form
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
मदनुग्रहाय परमं गुह्यमध्यात्मसंज्ञितम् ।यत्त्वयोक्तं वचस्तेन मोहोऽयं विगतो मम ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ guhyam adhyātma-saṁjñitamyat tvayoktaṁ vachas tena moho ’yaṁ vigato mama [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: ayam–this; mama mohaḥ–ignorance of mine, about You; vigataḥ–has been dispelled; tena–by that; paramam–most; guhyam–secret; vachaḥ–revelation; adhyātma-saṁjñitam–pertaining to the divine glories of Your Supreme Self; yat–as; uktam–described; tvayā–by You; mat-anugrahāya–out of Your mercy for me.[1]
1 Arjuna said: By Your grace, You have revealed Your hidden treasure to me, and my ignorance of Your Supreme Self has been dispelled.
भवाप्ययौ हि भूतानां श्रुतौ विस्तरशो मया ।त्वत्तः कमलपत्राक्ष माहात्म्यमपि चाव्ययम् ॥२॥
bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ śrutau vistaraśo mayātvattaḥ kamala-patrākṣa māhātmyam api chāvyayam [2]
(he) kamala-patra-akṣa–O Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus flower; hi–certainly; vistaraśaḥ–elaborately; bhava-apyayau–the manifestation and withdrawal; bhūtānām–of all beings; śrutau–has been heard; mayā–by me; tvattaḥ–from You; cha–and; (tava)–Your; avyayam–inexhaustible; māhātmyam–glories; api–too; (śrutam)–have been heard. [2]
2 O beautiful lotus-eyed Lord, I have heard Your elaborate description of the manifestation and dissolution of the living beings, and I have also heard Your description of Your inexhaustible glories.
एवमेतद्यथात्थ त्वमात्मानं परमेश्वर ।द्रष्टुमिच्छामि ते रूपमैश्वरं पुरुषोत्तम ॥३॥
evam etad yathāttha tvam ātmānaṁ parameśvaradraṣṭum ichchhāmi te rūpam aiśvaraṁ puruṣottama [3]
(he) parama-īśvara–O Supreme Lord; yathā–as; tvam–You; āttha–have spoken; ātmānam–of the glories pertaining to Yourself; evam–such; etat–is so; (tathāpi)–yet; (he) puruṣa-uttama–O Supreme Person; (aham) ichchhāmi–I wish; draṣṭum–to see; te–Your; aiśvaram–glorious; rūpam–form. [3]
3 O Lord, You have perfectly described Your Supreme Self. Yet, O Puruṣottam, I wish to see this glorious form of Yours.
मन्यसे यदि तच्छक्यं मया द्रष्टुमिति प्रभो ।योगेश्वर ततो मे त्वं दर्शयात्मानमव्ययम् ॥४॥
manyase yadi tach chhakyaṁ mayā draṣṭum iti prabhoyogeśvara tato me tvaṁ darśayātmānam avyayam [4]
(he) prabho–O Lord; yadi–if; manyase iti–You consider; tat–that; śakyam draṣṭum–is possible to be seen; mayā–by me; tataḥ–then; (he) yoga-īśvara–O all-powerful one; tvam–You; darśaya–please reveal; avyayam ātmānam–Your imperishable Self; me–to me. [4]
4 O Yogeśvar, I implore Thee, if You consider it possible for me to see it, please reveal Your imperishable form to me.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
पश्य मे पार्थ रूपाणि शतशोऽथ सहस्रशः ।नानाविधानि दिव्यानि नानावर्णाकृतीनि च ॥५॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
paśya me pārtha rūpāṇi śataśo ’tha sahasraśaḥnānā-vidhāni divyāni nānā-varṇākṛtīni cha [5]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) pārtha–O Pārtha; paśya–see; me–My; śataśaḥ–hundreds; atha sahasraśaḥ–of thousands of; divyāni–divine; rūpāṇi–forms; nānā-vidhāni–of many kinds; nānā-varṇa-ākṛtīni cha–and many colours and shapes. [5]
5 The Supreme Lord said: O Pārtha, behold My innumerable divine forms of many kinds, colours, and shapes.
पश्यादित्यान्वसून् रुद्रानश्विनौ मरुतस्तथा ।बहून्यदृष्टपूर्व्वाणि पश्याश्चर्य्याणि भारत ॥६॥
paśyādityān vasūn rudrān aśvinau marutas tathābahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi paśyāścharyāṇi bhārata [6]
(he) bhārata–O descendant of Bharat; paśya–see; ādityān–the twelve Ādityas; vasūn–the eight Vasus; rudrān–the eleven Rudras; aśvinau–the Aśvinī twins; tathā marutaḥ–and the forty-nine Vāyus. paśya–See; bahūni–many; āścharyāṇi–wondrous forms; adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi–hitherto unseen. [6]
6 O Bhārat, behold the gods—Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Aśvinī Kumāras, and Vāyus. Behold many wondrous forms, hitherto unseen.
इहैकस्थं जगत्कृत्स्नं पश्याद्य सचराचरम् ।मम देहे गुडाकेश यच्चान्यद्द्रष्टुमिच्छसि ॥७॥
ihaikasthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ paśyādya sa-charācharammama dehe guḍākeśa yach chānyad draṣṭum ichchhasi [7]
(he) guḍākeśa–O conqueror of sleep; kṛtsnam–the whole; jagat–universe; sa-chara-acharam–including moving and stationary beings; eka-stham–is situated in one place; iha dehe–in this form; mama–of Mine; cha–and; yat–whatever; anyat–else; (tvam)–you;  ichchhasi–wish; draṣṭum–to see; paśya–see; (tadapi)–that too; adya–today. [7]
7 O vigilant Arjuna, behold in one place, in this form of Mine, the whole universe of moving and stationary beings, or anything else you desire to see.
न तु मां शक्यसे द्रष्टुमनेनैव स्वचक्षुषा ।दिव्यं ददामि ते चक्षुः पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम् ॥८॥
na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum anenaiva svachakṣuṣādivyaṁ dadāmi te chakṣuḥ paśya me yogam aiśvaram [8]
tu–But; anena–with these; svachakṣuṣā eva–present eyes of yours; (tvam)–you; na śakyase–cannot; draṣṭum–see; mām–Me. dadāmi–(So) I give; te–you; divyam–divine; chakṣuḥ–eyes. paśya–Behold; me–My; aiśvaram–opulences; yogam–of divine potency. [8]
8 But you cannot see Me with these eyes, so I give you divine vision. Behold My divine opulences.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
एवमुक्त्वा ततो राजन्महायोगेश्वरो हरिः ।दर्शयामास पार्थाय परमं रूपमैश्वरम् ॥९॥
sañjaya uvācha
evam uktvā tato rājan mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥdarśayāmāsa pārthāya paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram [9]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: (he) rājan–O King Dhṛtarāṣṭra; uktvā–speaking; evam–in this way; mahā-yoga-īśvaraḥ–the omnipotent Supreme Lord; hariḥ–Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tataḥ–then; darśayāmāsa–revealed; paramam–His almighty; aiśvaram–magnificent; rūpam–form; pārthāya–to Arjuna. [9]
9 Sañjaya said: O King Dhṛtarāṣṭra, speaking thus to Arjuna, the omnipotent Supreme Lord Śrī Hari revealed His magnificent, almighty form.
अनेकवक्त्रनयनमनेकाद्भुतदर्शनम् ।अनेकदिव्याभरणं दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम् ॥१०॥
दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरं दिव्यगन्धानुलेपनम् ।सर्व्वाश्चर्य्यमयं देवमनन्तं विश्वतोमुखम् ॥११॥
aneka-vaktra-nayanam anekādbhuta-darśanamaneka-divyābharaṇaṁ divyānekodyatāyudham [10]
divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ divya-gandhānulepanamsarvāścharyamayaṁ devam anantaṁ viśvato-mukham [11]
(hariḥ)–The Supreme Lord; (rūpaṁ darśayāmāsa)–revealed His form; aneka-vaktra-nayanam–of many mouths and eyes; aneka-adbhuta-darśanam–many wonders; aneka-divya-ābharaṇam–many effulgent ornaments; divya-aneka-udyata-āyudham–and many raised gleaming weapons; divya-mālya-ambara-dharam–resplendently garlanded and dressed; divya-gandha-anulepanam–anointed with celestial fragrances; sarva-āścharya-mayam–all-wonderful; anantam–unlimited; devam–effulgent; viśvataḥ-mukham–and facing all directions of the universe. [10–11]
10–11 The Lord revealed His effulgent, omnipresent, all-wonderful universal form of many mouths and eyes, many marvels, effulgent dress and garlands, anointed with celestial fragrances, many dazzling ornaments, and gleaming upraised weapons.
दिवि सूर्य्यसहस्रस्य भवेद्युगपदुत्थिता ।यदि भाः सदृशी सा स्याद्भासस्तस्य महात्मनः ॥१२॥
divi sūrya-sahasrasya bhaved yugapad utthitāyadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ [12]
yadi–If; yugapat–simultaneously; bhāḥ–the effulgence; sūrya-sahasrasya–of a thousand suns; utthitā bhavet–appeared; divi–in the sky; (tarhi)–then; syāt–perhaps; sā–that; sadṛśī–might resemble; bhāsaḥ–the effulgence; tasya mahā-ātmanaḥ–of this supreme universal form. [12]
12 The brilliance of a thousand suns appearing simultaneously in the sky might resemble the effulgence of this great universal form of the Lord.
तत्रैकस्थं जगत्कृत्स्नं प्रविभक्तमनेकधा ।अपश्यद्देवदेवस्य शरीरे पाण्डवस्तदा ॥१३॥
tatraika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ pravibhaktam anekadhāapaśyad deva-devasya śarīre pāṇḍavas tadā [13]
tadā–Then; tatra–there on the battlefield; pāṇḍavaḥ–Arjuna; apaśyat–saw; śarīre–in the body; deva-devasya–of the God of gods; kṛtsnam–the entire; jagat–universe; eka-stham–situated in one; aneka-dhā–variously; pravibhaktam–divided. [13]
13 In that moment, there on the battlefield, Arjuna saw the entire multi-faceted universe in one, within the body of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme God of gods.
ततः स विस्मयाविष्टो हृष्टरोमा धनञ्जयः ।प्रणम्य शिरसा देवं कृताञ्जलिरभाषत ॥१४॥
tataḥ sa vismayāviṣṭo hṛṣṭa-romā dhanañjayaḥpraṇamya śirasā devaṁ kṛtāñjalir abhāṣata [14]
tataḥ–After that; (san)–being; vismaya-āviṣṭaḥ–astonished; hṛṣṭa-romāḥ–with body hairs standing on end; saḥ dhanañjayaḥ–Arjuna; praṇamya–offering obeisances; śirasā–with bowed head; devam–unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; abhāṣata–spoke; kṛta-añjaliḥ–placing his palms together in prayer. [14]
14 Astonished, the hairs of his body standing on end, Arjuna bowed his head in obeisance to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Placing his palms together, he prayed.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
पश्यामि देवांस्तव देव देहे सर्व्वांस्तथा भूतविशेषसङ्घान् ।ब्रह्माणमीशं कमलासनस्थम्ऋषींश्च सर्व्वानुरगांश्च दिव्यान् ॥१५॥
arjuna uvācha
paśyāmi devāṁs tava deva dehesarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghānbrahmāṇam īśaṁ kamalāsana-sthamṛṣīṁś cha sarvān uragāṁś cha divyān [15]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) deva–O Lord; (aham) paśyāmi–I see; tava dehe–within Your body; sarvān–all; devān–the demigods; tathā–and; bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān–all species of life; sarvān–all; divyān ṛṣīn–the celestial sages; uragān–and serpents; īśam cha–and Mahādev, Lord Śiva; brahmāṇam cha–and Lord Brahmā, too; kamala-āsana-stham–seated on the lotus flower. [15]
15 Arjuna said: O Lord, I see within Your body the demigods, all species of life, the celestial sages and serpents, Mahādev, and Lord Brahmā seated on the lotus flower.
अनेकबाहूदरवक्त्रनेत्रंपश्यामि त्वां सर्व्वतोऽनन्तरूपम् ।नान्तं न मध्यं न पुनस्तवादिंपश्यामि विश्वेश्वर विश्वरूप ॥१॥
aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁpaśyāmi tvāṁ sarvato ’nanta-rūpamnāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁpaśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa [16]
(he) viśva-īśvara–O Lord of the universe; (he) viśva-rūpa–O universal form; (aham) paśyāmi–I see; tvām–You; ananta-rūpam–of infinite form; sarvataḥ–in all directions; aneka-bāhu-udara-vaktra-netram–with Your many arms, bellies, mouths, and eyes. punaḥ–Yet; (aham) paśyāmi–I see; na ādim–no beginning; na madhyam–no middle; na antam–and no end; tava–of You. [16]
16 O Lord of the universe, O universal form, in all directions I see Your infinite form of many arms, bellies, mouths and eyes. I see no beginning, middle, or end of You.
किरीटिनं गदिनं चक्रिणञ्चतेजोराशिं सर्व्वतो दीप्तिमन्तम् ।पश्यामि त्वां दुर्निरीक्ष्यं समन्ताद्दीप्तानलार्कद्युतिमप्रमेयम् ॥१७॥
kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ chakriṇañ chatejorāśiṁ sarvato dīptimantampaśyāmi tvāṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ samantāddīptānalārka-dyutim aprameyam [17]
(aham) paśyāmi–I see; tvām–You; samantāt–everywhere; kirīṭinam–with crown; gadinam–club; cha–and; chakriṇam–disc; tejaḥ-rāśim–a mass of effulgence; sarvataḥ dīptimantam–illuminating all; dipta-anala-arka-dyutim–like the blazing fire of the sun; durnirīkṣyam–difficult to behold; aprameyam–and incomprehensible. [17]
17 I see You everywhere with crown, club, and disc, a mass of effulgence illuminating all like the blazing light of the sun, difficult to behold and incomprehensible.
त्वमक्षरं परमं वेदितव्यंत्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम् ।त्वमव्ययः शाश्वतधर्म्मगोप्त सनातनस्त्वं पुरुषो मतो मे ॥१८॥
tvam akṣaraṁ paramaṁ veditavyaṁtvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānamtvam avyayaḥ śāśvata-dharma-goptāsanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me [18]
tvam paramam akṣaram–You are Parabrahma; veditavyam–knowable by the Vedas. tvam param–You are the supreme; nidhānam–reservoir; asya viśvasya–of this universe. tvam avyayaḥ–You are the imperishable; śāśvata-dharma-goptā–preserver of Vedic sanātan-dharma, the eternal religion. tvam sanātanaḥ–You are the eternal; puruṣaḥ–Supreme Personality; (iti)–this is; me–my; mataḥ–understanding. [18]
18 You are the Supreme Absolute Truth knowable by the Vedas. You are the supreme reservoir of the universe and the imperishable preserver of the eternal religion described in the Vedas. I now understand You to be the eternal Supreme Personality.
अनादिमध्यान्तमनन्तवीर्य्यम्अन्तबाहुं शशिसूर्य्यनेत्रम् ।पश्यामि त्वां दीप्तहुताशवक्त्रस्वतेजसा विश्वमिदं तपन्तम् ॥१९॥
anādi-madhyāntam ananta-vīryamananta-bāhuṁ śaśi-sūrya-netrampaśyāmi tvāṁ dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁsvatejasā viśvam idaṁ tapantam [19]
(aham) paśyāmi–I see; tvām–You; anādi-madhya-antam–without beginning, middle, and end; ananta-vīryam–infinitely powerful; ananta-bāhum–with infinite arms; śaśi-sūrya-netram–and Your eyes are the sun and moon; dīpta-hutāśa-vaktram–Your mouth of blazing fire; idam viśvam–this universe; tapantam–is seared; svatejasā–by Your radiance. [19]
19 I see You without beginning, middle, or end, infinitely powerful with countless arms. Your eyes are the sun and the moon, Your mouth is blazing fire, and the entire universe is seared by Your radiance.
द्यावापृथिव्योरिदमन्तरं हिव्याप्तं त्वयैकेन दिशश्च सर्व्वाः ।दृष्ट्वाद्भुतं रूपमिदं तवोग्रंलोकत्रयं प्रव्यथितं महात्मन् ॥२०॥
dyāv āpṛthivyor idam antaraṁ hivyāptaṁ tvayaikena diśaś cha sarvāḥdṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam idaṁ tavograṁloka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman [20]
hi–Certainly; idam–this; antaram–space between; dyau āpṛthivyoḥ–heaven and earth; sarvāḥ diśaḥ cha–and all directions; vyāptam–are pervaded; tvayā–by You; ekena–alone. (he) mahā-ātman–O gracious one; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; idam–this; adbhutam–wondrous; ugram–fearsome; rūpam–form; tava–of Yours; loka-trayam–all the three worlds; pravyathitam–are terrified. [20]
20 You alone pervade all directions and all space between heaven and earth. O gracious one, seeing this wondrous and fearsome form of Yours, all the inhabitants of the three worlds are terrified.
अमी हि त्वां सुरसङ्घा विशन्तिकेचिद्भीताः प्राञ्जलयो गृणन्ति ।स्वस्तीत्युक्त्वा महर्षिसिद्धसङ्घाःस्तुवन्ति त्वां स्तुतिभिः पुष्कलाभिः ॥२१॥
amī hi tvāṁ sura-saṅghā viśantikechid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛṇantisvastīty uktvā maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥstuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣkalābhiḥ [21]
amī–All these; sura-saṅghāḥ–demigods; viśanti–are entering; tvām hi–into You; kechit–some; bhītāḥ–fearfully; gṛṇanti–offering prayers; prāñjalayaḥ–with cupped hands. su-asti iti uktvā–“May auspiciousness come to the world”—saying this; mahā-ṛṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ–the great sages and perfected beings; stuvanti–are offering prayers; tvām–to You; puṣkalābhiḥ–by excellent; stutibhiḥ–verses singing Your glories. [21]
21 All the demigods are entering into You, some fearfully offering You prayers with cupped hands. The great sages and perfected beings are singing Your glories in beautiful verses, saying, “May all auspiciousness come to the world.”
रुद्रादित्या वसवो ये च साध्याविश्वेऽश्विनौ मरुतश्चोष्मपाश्च ।गन्धर्व्वयक्षासुरसिद्धसङ्घावीक्षन्ते त्वां विस्मिताश्चैव सर्व्वे ॥२२॥
rudrādityā vasavo ye cha sādhyāviśve ’śvinau marutaś choṣmapāś chagandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghāvīkṣante tvāṁ vismitāś chaiva sarve [22]
rudra-ādityāḥ–The Rudras and the Ādityas; vasavaḥ–the Vasus; ye cha (nāma)–and those called; sādhyāḥ–the Sādhyas; viśve–the Viśvadevas; aśvinau–the Aśvinī Kumāras; marutaḥ cha–and the Vāyus; uṣma-pāḥ cha–and the forefather-demigods; gandharva-yakṣa-asura-siddha-saṅghāḥ cha–and also the Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Asuras, and perfected beings; (te) sarve eva–indeed, they all; vismitāḥ–marvel; vīkṣante tvām–to behold You. [22]
22 The Rudras, Ādityas, Vasus, Sādhyas, Viśvadevas, Aśvinī Kumāras, Vāyus, deities of the forefathers, the Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Asuras, and Siddhas—indeed, they all marvel to behold You.
रूपं महत्ते बहुवक्त्रनेत्रंमहाबाहो बहुबाहूरुपादम् ।बहूदरं बहुदंष्ट्राकरालंदृष्ट्वा लोकाः प्रव्यथितास्तथाहम् ॥२३॥
rūpaṁ mahat te bahu-vaktra-netraṁmahā-bāho bahu-bāhūru-pādambahūdaraṁ bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁdṛṣṭvā lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham [23]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty-armed Kṛṣṇa; lokāḥ–all; tathā aham–including myself; pravyathitāḥ–are afflicted with fear; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; te–Your; mahat–vast; rūpam–form; bahu-vaktra-netram–of many mouths and eyes; bahu-bāhu-uru-pādam–many arms, thighs, and feet; bahu-udaram–many bellies; bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālam–and fearful with many teeth. [23]
23 O mighty-armed one, seeing Your vast form of many mouths, eyes, arms, legs, feet, and bellies, fearful with its many teeth, all beings, including myself, are afflicted with fear.
नभःस्पृशं दीप्तमनेकवर्णंव्यात्ताननं दीप्तविशालनेत्रम् ।दृष्ट्वा हि त्वां प्रव्यथितान्तरात्माधृतिं न विन्दामि शमञ्च विष्णो ॥२४॥
nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ dīptam aneka-varṇaṁvyāttānanaṁ dīpta-viśāla-netramdṛṣṭvā hi tvāṁ pravyathitāntar-ātmādhṛtiṁ na vindāmi śamañ cha viṣṇo [24]
(he) viṣṇo–O pervader of the universe; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; tvām–You; nabhaḥ-spṛśam–sky-touching; dīptam–dazzling; aneka-varṇam–multi-coloured; vyātta-ānanam–of gaping mouth; dīpta-viśāla-netram–and huge fiery eye; (aham)–I; pravyathita-antaḥ-ātmā–with extremely fearful heart; na hi vindāmi dhṛtim śamam cha––cannot find equilibrium or peace. [24]
24 O Viṣṇu, seeing Your sky-touching, dazzling form of myriad colours, with gaping mouth and huge fiery eye, my heart trembles with fear, and I cannot find equilibrium or peace.
दंष्ट्राकरालानि च ते मुखानिदृष्ट्वैव कालानलसन्निभानि ।दिशो न जाने न लभे च शर्म्मप्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास ॥२५॥
daṁṣṭrā-karālāni cha te mukhānidṛṣṭvaiva kālānala-sannibhānidiśo na jāne na labhe cha śarmaprasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa [25]
dṛṣṭvā eva–Seeing; te–Your; mukhāni–mouths; daṁṣṭrā-karālāni–ghastly with their teeth; kāla-anala sannibhāni cha–and resembling the fire of the universal annihilation; (aham)–I; na jāne–cannot know; diśaḥ–the directions; na labhe–nor can I find; śarma cha–composure. (he) deva-īśa–O God of gods; (he) jagat-nivāsa–O abode of the universe; (tvam) prasīda–be gracious. [25]
25 Seeing Your mouths resembling the fire of the universal annihilation, ghastly with their terrible teeth, I am distraught and have lost my bearings. Be gracious, O Lord of the gods, O abode of the universe.
अमी च त्वां धृतराष्ट्रस्य पुत्राःसर्व्वे सहैवावनिपालसङ्घैः ।भीष्मो द्रोणः सूतपुत्रस्तथासौसहास्मदीयैरपि योधमुख्यैः ॥२६॥
वक्त्राणि ते त्वरमाणा विशन्तदंष्ट्राकरालानि भयानकानि ।केचिद्विलग्ना दशनान्तरेषुसन्दृश्यन्ते चूर्णितैरुत्तमाङ्गैः ॥२७॥
amī cha tvāṁ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥsarve sahaivāvanipāla-saṅghaiḥbhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsausahāsmadīyair api yodha-mukhyaiḥ [26]
vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśantidaṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakānikechid vilagnā daśanāntareṣusandṛśyante chūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ [27]
amī cha sarve–All these; putrāḥ–sons; dhṛtarāṣṭrasya–of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; avani-pāla-saṅghaiḥ saha eva–along with their allied kings; tathā–as well as; bhīṣmaḥ–Bhīṣma; droṇaḥ–Droṇa; asau sūta-putraḥ–and that Karṇa; saha api–along with; yodha-mukhyaiḥ–the chief warriors; asmadīyaiḥ–of our party; tvaramāṇāḥ–are swiftly; (viśanti)–entering; tvām–You; viśanti–entering; te–Your; bhayānakāni–terrible; vaktrāṇi–mouths; daṁṣṭrā-karālāni–of terrible teeth. kechit–Some; saṁdṛśyante–are seen; chūrṇitaiḥ-uttama-aṅgaiḥ–with crushed heads; vilagnāḥ–caught; daśana-antareṣu–between the teeth. [26–27]
26–27 The sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, their allied kings, and Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Karṇa, along with our chief warriors, are all rushing into Your dreadful mouths of terrible teeth. Some can be seen with their heads caught and crushed by Your teeth.
यथा नदीनां बहवोऽम्बुवेगाःसमुद्रमेवाभिमुखा द्रवन्ति ।तथा तवामी नरलोकवीराविशन्ति वक्त्राण्यभितो ज्वलन्ति ॥२८॥
yathā nadīnāṁ bahavo ’mbu-vegāḥsamudram evābhimukhā dravantitathā tavāmī nara-loka-vīrāviśanti vaktrāṇy abhito jvalanti [28]
yathā–As; bahavaḥ–many; ambu-vegāḥ–currents of water; nadīnām–of rivers; abhimukhāḥ (santaḥ)–flowing towards the ocean; dravanti eva–enter; samudram–the ocean; tathā–similarly; amī–all these; nara-loka-vīrāḥ–heroic men; viśanti–are entering; tava–Your; vaktrāṇi–mouths; jvalanti–which are fiery, illuminating; abhitaḥ–all around. [28]
28 As many rivers flow towards the ocean to finally enter into it, so these heroes of the world are entering Your flaming mouths that illuminate all around.
यथा प्रदीप्तं ज्वलनं पतङ्ग विशन्ति नाशाय समृद्धवेगाः ।तथैव नाशाय विशन्ति लोकास्तवापि वक्त्राणि समृद्धवेगाः ॥२९॥
yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgāviśanti nāśāya samṛddha-vegāḥtathaiva nāśāya viśanti lokāstavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛddha-vegāḥ [29]
yathā–As; pataṅgāḥ–insects; samṛddha-vegāḥ–are impelled; nāśāya–to their destruction; viśanti–entering into; pradīptam–blazing; jvalanam–fire; tathā–similarly; lokāḥ api–all the worlds; samṛddha-vegāḥ (santaḥ)–are helplessly rushing; viśanti–entering into; tava vaktrāṇi–Your mouths; nāśāya eva–to certain death. [29]
29 As moths are impelled to their death in blazing fire, similarly, all the worlds are helplessly rushing to certain death, entering into Your mouths.
लेलिह्यसे ग्रसमानः समन्ताल्लोकान्समग्रान्वदनैर्ज्वलद्भिः ।तेजोभिरापूर्य्य जगत्समग्रंभासस्तवोग्राः प्रतपन्ति विष्णो ॥३०॥
lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāllokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥtejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁbhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo [30]
(he) viṣṇo–O pervader of the universe; (tvam)–You; lelihyase–are relishing; grasamānaḥ–devouring; samagrān–all these; lokān–persons, worlds; samantāt–in all directions; jvaladbhiḥ vadanaiḥ–with Your flaming mouths. āpūrya–Filled; tava tejobhiḥ–with Your effulgence; ugrāḥ–of severe; bhāsaḥ–glare; samagram jagat–the whole universe; pratapanti–is being seared. [30]
30 O Viṣṇu, with Your flaming mouths, You are relishing devouring all the worlds, Your all-pervading, glaring effulgence searing the entire universe.
आख्याहि मे को भवानुग्ररूपोनमोऽस्तु ते देववर प्रसीद ।विज्ञातुमिच्छामि भवन्तमाद्यंन हि प्रजानामि तव प्रवृत्तिम् ॥३१॥
ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūponamo ’stu te deva-vara prasīdavijñātum ichchhāmi bhavantam ādyaṁna hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim [31]
ākhyāhi me–Please tell me; kaḥ bhavān–who are You; ugra-rūpaḥ–of fearsome form. namaḥ astu–I offer obeisance; te–unto You. (he) deva-vara–O Lord of lords; (tvam) prasīda–be gracious. (aham) ichchhāmi–I wish; vijñātum–to fully know; bhavantam–You; ādyam–the Origin; hi–as; (aham)–I; na prajānāmi–cannot understand; tava–Your; pravṛttim–intention. [31]
31 O fearsome one, please tell me who You are. O Lord of the gods, I offer obeisance unto You; please be gracious. I wish to fully know You, the Origin, as I cannot understand your actions.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धोलोकान्समाहर्त्तुमिह प्रवृत्तः ।ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्व्वेयेऽवस्थिताः प्रत्यनीकेषु योधाः ॥३२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddholokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarveye ’vasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣu yodhāḥ [32]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (aham) asmi–I am; pravṛddhaḥ–mighty; kālaḥ–time; loka-kṣaya-kṛt–the destroyer of all beings; pravṛttaḥ–engaged; samāhartum–to annihilate; lokān–all beings; iha–in this plane. ye yodhāḥ–Of those warriors; avasthitāḥ–present; pratyanīkeṣu–in the enemy army; (te) sarve na bhaviṣyanti–none will be spared; tvām ṛte api–despite you. [32]
32 The Supreme Lord said: I am the time, the mighty vanquisher of all, and I am engaged in destroying the worlds. Even if you do not slay them, not one of the warriors in the enemy party will be spared.
तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्वजित्वा शत्रून्भुङ्क्ष्व राज्यं समृद्धम् ।मयैवैते निहताः पूर्व्वमेवनिमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन् ॥३३॥
tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasvajitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ samṛddhammayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam evanimitta-mātraṁ bhava savyasāchin [33]
tasmāt–Therefore; tvam–you; uttiṣṭha–arise for battle; labhasva–take; yaśaḥ–the credit; jitvā–and conquering; śatrūn–the enemies; bhuṅkṣva–enjoy; samṛddham rājyam–a flourishing kingdom. ete–All these warriors; nihatāḥ–have been slain; mayā eva–by Me; pūrvam eva–long before. (he) savyasāchin–O Arjuna, who can skilfully shoot arrows even with his left hand; (tvam)–you; bhava–be; nimitta-mātram–but an instrument. [33]
33 So arise! Be glorious! Conquer the enemies and enjoy a flourishing kingdom. All these warriors have already been killed by Me. O Savyasāchin, you be but an instrument.
द्रोणञ्च भीष्मञ्च जयद्रथञ्चकर्णं तथान्यानपि योधवीरान् ।मया हतांस्त्वं जहि मा व्यथिष्ठायुध्यस्व जेतासि रणे सपत्नान् ॥३४॥
droṇañ cha bhīṣmañ cha jayadrathañ chakarṇaṁ tathānyān api yodha-vīrānmayā hatāṁs tvaṁ jahi mā vyathiṣṭhāyudhyasva jetāsi raṇe sapatnān [34]
tvam–You; jahi–slay; droṇam cha–Droṇa; bhīṣmam cha–Bhīṣma; jayadratham–Jayadratha; karṇam cha–and Karṇa; tathā–as; anyān api–any other; yodha-vīrān–warriors desiring battle; hatān–(but already) killed; mayā–by Me. mā vyathiṣṭhāḥ–Fear not; yudhyasva–fight! jetā asi–You shall conquer; sapatnān–the enemy; raṇe–in battle. [34]
34 Slay Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Jayadratha, Karṇa, and the many warriors who are as good as slain by Me. Fear not, fight! You will be victorious over the enemy.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
एतच्छ्रुत्वा वचनं केशवस्यकृताञ्जलिर्वेपमानः किरीटी ।नमस्कृत्वा भूय एवाह कृष्णंसगद्गदं भीतभीतः प्रणम्य ॥३५॥
sañjaya uvācha
etach chhrutvā vachanaṁ keśavasyakṛtāñjalir vepamānaḥ kirīṭīnamaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁsagadgadaṁ bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya [35]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: śrutvā–Hearing; etat vachanam–these words; keśavasya–of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kirīṭī–Arjuna; vepamānaḥ–trembling; kṛta-añjaliḥ (san)–placing the palms of his hands together in prayer; namaḥ-kṛtvā–bowing; bhīta-bhītaḥ eva–with a very fearful heart; bhūyaḥ–again; praṇamya–offering obeisances; āha–spoke; kṛṣṇam–to Lord Kṛṣṇa; sa-gad-gadam–falteringly. [35]
35 Sañjaya said: Hearing these words of the Lord, the trembling Arjuna bowed his head, placing the palms of his hands together in prayer. With a fearful heart, bowing again, he spoke falteringly.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
स्थाने हृषीकेश तव प्रकीर्त्त्याजगत्प्रहृष्यत्यनुरज्यते च ।रक्षांसि भीतानि दिशो द्रवन्तिसर्व्वे नमस्यन्ति च सिद्धसङ्घाः ॥३६॥
arjuna uvācha
sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyājagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate charakṣāṁsi bhītāni diśo dravantisarve namasyanti cha siddha-saṅghāḥ [36]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) hṛṣīkeśa–O Lord of the senses of all beings; sthāne–rightfully; jagat–the whole world; prahṛṣyati–is joyful; tava prakīrtyā–by singing Your glories; cha anurajyate–with love; rakṣāmsi–the demons; bhītāni (santaḥ)–being afraid; dravanti–run; diśaḥ–in all four directions; cha–and; sarve–all; siddha-saṅghāḥ–the perfected beings; namasyanti–offer respects, obeisance. [36]
36 Arjuna said: O Hṛṣīkeś, it is fitting that the whole world joyfully sings Your glories with love, the demons flee, scattering in all directions, and the perfected beings offer obeisance to You.
कस्माच्च ते न नमेरन्महात्मन्गरीयसे ब्रह्मणोऽप्यादिकर्त्त्रे ।अनन्त देवेश जगन्निवासत्वमक्षरं सदसत्तत्परं यत् ॥३७॥
kasmāch cha te na nameran mahātmangarīyase brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartreananta deveśa jagan-nivāsatvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat [37]
(he) mahā-ātman–O gracious personality; (he) ananta–O infinite, embodiment of all; (he) deva-īśa–O God of gods; (he) jagat-nivāsa–O abode of the universe; garīyase–the worshippable; ādi-kartre cha–and the creator; brahmaṇaḥ api–of even Lord Brahmā; kasmāt (sarve) na nameran–how would they all not bow; te–to You? tvam sat asat–You are the manifest and the unmanifest, the material effect and cause; akṣaram–the Imperishable, Brahma; tat param yat–that which is transcendental, the Supreme. [37]
37 And, O gracious one, how would they not bow to You, the worshippable creator of even the creator Lord Brahmā? O infinite God of gods, O abode of the universe, You are the manifest, the unmanifest, the Supreme Imperishable.
त्वमादिदेवः पुरुषः पुराणस्त्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम् ।वेत्तासि वेद्यञ्च परञ्च धामत्वया ततं विश्वमनन्तरूप ॥३८॥
tvam ādi-devaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇastvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānamvettāsi vedyañ cha parañ cha dhāmatvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa [38]
tvam (asi)–You are; ādi-devaḥ–the original Lord; purāṇaḥ puruṣaḥ–the eternal personality; tvam asi–You are; param–the only; nidhānam–refuge, resting place; asya viśvasya–of this universe; vettā–the knower; vedyam cha–and the knowable; param dhāma cha–and the supreme abode. (he) ananta-rūpa–O Lord of infinite forms; viśvam–the universe; tatam–is pervaded; tvayā–by You. [38]
38 You are the eternal origin of all the demigods, and the only refuge of this universe. You alone are the knower and the knowable, and the supreme abode. O Lord of infinite forms, the entire universe is pervaded by You.
वायुर्यमोऽग्निर्वरुणः शशाङ्कःप्रजापतिस्त्वं प्रपितामहश्च ।नमो नमस्तेऽस्तु सहस्रकृत्वःपुनश्च भूयोऽपि नमो नमस्ते ॥३९॥
vāyur yamo ’gnir varuṇaḥ śaśāṅkaḥprajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaś chanamo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥpunaś cha bhūyo ’pi namo namas te [39]
tvam vāyuḥ–You are the god of air; yamaḥ–the god of death; agniḥ–the god of fire; varuṇaḥ–the god of the ocean; śaśāṅkaḥ–the god of the moon; prajāpatiḥ–the universal father, Lord Brahmā; prapitāmahaḥ cha–and the grandfather, too. namaḥ astu–My obeisances; te–unto You; sahasra-kṛtvaḥ–thousands of times; puṇaḥ cha namaḥ–and again obeisances; bhūyaḥ api–and yet again; namaḥ namaḥ–obeisances, obeisances; te–unto You. [39]
39 You are the father and grandfather of all beings, You are air, death, fire, the ocean, and the moon. Obeisances unto You thousands of times, again and yet again.
नमः पुरस्तादथ पृष्ठतस्तेनमोऽस्तु ते सर्व्वत एव सर्व्व ।अनन्तवीर्य्यामितविक्रमस्त्वंसर्व्वं समाप्नोषि ततोऽसि सर्व्वः ॥४०॥
namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas tenamo ’stu te sarvata eva sarvaananta-vīryāmita-vikramas tvaṁsarvaṁ samāpnoṣi tato ’si sarvaḥ [40]
(he) sarva–O embodiment of all existences; namaḥ–my obeisances; te–unto You; purastāt–from the front; atha–and; pṛṣṭhataḥ–from the rear. namaḥ astu–I offer obeisances; te–unto You; eva–indeed; sarvataḥ–from all directions. (he) ananta-vīrya–O Lord of infinite potency; amita-vikramaḥ–of immeasurable prowess; tvam–You; samāpnoṣi–pervade; sarvam–all; tataḥ–therefore; asi–You are; sarvaḥ–all. [40]
40 O embodiment of all existences, my obeisances unto You from the front, behind, and all directions. O Lord of unlimited potency and immeasurable prowess, You pervade all, therefore You are all.
सखेति मत्वा प्रसभं यदुक्तंहे कृष्ण हे यादव हे सखेति ।अजानता महिमानं तवेदंमया प्रमादात्प्रणयेन वापि ॥४१॥
यच्चावहासार्थमसत्कृतोऽसिविहारशय्यासनभोजनेषु ।एकोऽथवाप्यच्युत तत्समक्षंतत्क्षामये त्वामहमप्रमेयम् ॥४२॥
sakheti matvā prasabhaṁ yad uktaṁhe kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakhetiajānatā mahimānaṁ tavedaṁmayā pramādāt praṇayena vāpi [41]
yach chāvahāsārtham asatkṛto ’sivihāra-śayyāsana-bhojaneṣueko ’thavāpy achyuta tat-samakṣaṁtat kṣāmaye tvām aham aprameyam [42]
ajānatā–Not knowing; tava–Your; mahimānam–greatness; idam cha–and this (universal form); pramādāt–inadvertantly; praṇayena vā api–and due to intimacy; sakhā iti matvā–thinking of You as a friend; yat uktam–whatever has been said; prasabham–rashly; mayā–by me; iti–thus: he kṛṣṇa–“O Kṛṣṇa; he yādava–Yādava; he sakhe–my friend”; (he) achyuta–O infallible one; yat asat-kṛtaḥ asi–whatever disrespect I have shown You; avahāsa-artham–in jest; vihāra-śayyā-āsana-bhojaneṣu–in recreation, resting, sitting, eating; ekaḥ–alone; athavā–or; api–even; tat-samakṣam–in the presence of others; tat–for all this; aham–I; tvām aprameyam kṣāmaye–beg You, the inconceivable, to please forgive me. [41–42]
41–42 Due to the familarity of affection I have rashly addressed You, “Kṛṣṇa,” “Yādava,” or “my friend,” ignorant of this Your greatness. O infallible Lord, whatever disrespect I have shown You—in jest, while relaxing, resting, sitting or eating, either alone with You or in company—I beg You, the inconceivable, to please forgive me for that.
पितासि लोकस्य चराचरस्यत्वमस्य पूज्यश्च गुरुर्गरीयान् ।न त्वत्समोऽस्त्यभ्यधिकः कुतोऽन्योलोकत्रयेऽप्यप्रतिमप्रभाव ॥४३॥
pitāsi lokasya charācharasyatvam asya pūjyaś cha gurur garīyānna tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyoloka-traye ’py apratima-prabhāva [43]
tvam asi–You are; pitā–the father; asya lokasya–of this universe; chara-acharasya–of moving and stationary beings; pūjyaḥ–the worshippable; garīyān–most glorious; guruḥ–teacher; cha–and; api–indeed; na asti–there is no one; tvat-samaḥ–equal to You; loka-traye–within the three worlds; kutaḥ–so how can; anyaḥ–another; abhyadhikaḥ–be superior; (he) apratima-prabhāva–O Lord of unrivalled power! [43]
43 You are the father of all living beings, the worshippable and most glorious teacher. You have no equal within these three worlds. How can there be anyone greater than You, O Lord of unrivalled power!
तस्मात्प्रणम्य प्रणिधाय कायंप्रसादये त्वामहमीशमीड्यम् ।पितेव पुत्रस्य सखेव सख्युःप्रियः प्रियायार्हसि देव सोढुम् ॥४४॥
tasmāt praṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṁprasādaye tvām aham īśam īḍyampiteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥpriyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum [44]
(he) deva–O Lord; tasmāt–therefore; kāyam praṇidhāya–prostrating my body; praṇamya–in obeisance; aham prasādaye–I am propitiating; tvām–You; īḍyam–the worshippable; īśam–Lord. iva–As; pitā sakhā priyaḥ–a father, friend or lover (forgive); putrasya sakhyuḥ priyāyāḥ–(the mistakes) of a son, friend or beloved; (tvam)–You; (tathā) iva–similarly; arhasi–please; soḍhum–forgive (me). [44]
44 So I offer my prostrate obeisance unto You, my Lord and worshippable master, praying for Your mercy. Please excuse me as a father, friend, or lover overlooks the mistakes of his son, companion, or beloved.
अदृष्टपूर्व्वं हृषितोऽस्मि दृष्ट्वाभयेन च प्रव्यथितं मनो मे ।तदेव मे दर्शय देव रूपंप्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास ॥४५॥
adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ hṛṣito ’smi dṛṣṭvābhayena cha pravyathitaṁ mano metad eva me darśaya deva rūpaṁprasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa [45]
(he) deva–O Lord; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; (idam) adṛṣṭa-pūrvam–this previously unseen universal form of Yours; hṛṣitaḥ asmi–I am joyful; cha–and then again; me–my; manaḥ–mind; bhayena pravyathitam–is distraught with fear. (he) deva-īśa–O God of gods; (he) jagat-nivāsa–O refuge of the universe; prasīda–may You be gracious; darśaya–to show; me–me; tat eva rūpam–that form You showed before. [45]
45 O Lord, my heart is joyful to see Your hitherto unseen universal form. Yet, I am afraid. O God of gods, shelter of the universe, be gracious upon me and appear in the form I saw before.
किरीटिनं गदिनं चक्रहस्तम्इच्छामि त्वां द्रष्टुमहं तथैव ।तेनैव रूपेण चतुर्भुजेनसहस्रबाहो भव विश्वमूर्त्ते ॥४६॥
kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ chakra-hastamichchhāmi tvāṁ draṣṭum ahaṁ tathaivatenaiva rūpeṇa chatur-bhujenasahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte [46]
aham–I; ichchhāmi–wish; draṣṭum–to see; tvām–You; tathā eva–as previously; kirīṭinam–with crown; gadinam–club; chakra-hastam–and holding the disc. (he) sahasra-bāho–O Lord with a thousand arms; (he) viśva-mūrte–O universal form; bhava–may You appear; tena chatuḥ-bhujena rūpeṇa eva–in that form of four arms. [46]
46 I wish to see You again wearing a crown and holding a club and disc. O thousand-armed Lord, O universal form, please appear in that four-armed form.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
मया प्रसन्नेन तवार्ज्जुनेदंरूपं परं दर्शितमात्मयोगात् ।तेजोमयं विश्वमनन्तमाद्यंयन्मे त्वदन्येन न दृष्टपूर्व्वम् ॥४७॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
mayā prasannena tavārjunedaṁrūpaṁ paraṁ darśitam ātma-yogāttejomayaṁ viśvam anantam ādyaṁyan me tvad-anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam [47]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; prasannena–being satisfied; idam–this; tejaḥ-mayam–effulgent; anantam–infinite; ādyam–and primeval; param–supreme; viśvam–universal; rūpam–form; me–of Mine; yat–which; na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam–was not seen previously; tvat-anyena–by anyone else; darśītam–has been shown; tava–to you; mayā–by Me; ātma-yogāt–by My divine potency, yogamāya. [47]
47 The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, to grant you My special favour I have today revealed this effulgent, universal, infinite, and primeval form, by My divine potency. This supreme universal form has never been seen by anyone before.
न वेदयज्ञाध्ययनैर्न दानैर्न च क्रियाभिर्न तपोभिरुग्रैः ।एवंरूपः शक्य अहं नृलोकेद्रष्टुं त्वदन्येन कुरुप्रवीर ॥४८॥
na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānairna cha kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥevaṁ-rūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛlokedraṣṭuṁ tvad-anyena kuru-pravīra [48]
(he) kuru-pravīra–O most valiant of the Kauravas; nṛ-loke–in this human plane; na veda-yajña-adhyayanaiḥ–neither by study of the Vedas or Vedic sacrifices; na dānaiḥ–nor by giving land, etc. in charity; na kriyābhiḥ–nor by rituals; na cha tapobhiḥ ugraiḥ–nor by severe austerity; śakyaḥ–can; aham–I; draṣṭum–be seen; evam-rūpaḥ–in such a (universal) form; tvat-anyena–by persons other than you. [48]
48 O Arjuna, most valiant of the Kauravas, no one in this human plane can see this form of Mine that you have seen, neither by study of the Vedas, nor Vedic sacrifices, nor charity, nor rituals, nor severe austerity.
मा ते व्यथा मा च विमूढभावोदृष्ट्वा रूपं घोरमीदृङ्ममेदम् ।व्यपेतभीः प्रीतमनाः पुनस्त्वंतदेव मे रूपमिदं प्रपश्य ॥४९॥
mā te vyathā mā cha vimūḍha-bhāvodṛṣṭvā rūpaṁ ghoram īdṛṅ mamedamvyapeta-bhīḥ prīta-manāḥ punas tvaṁtad eva me rūpam idaṁ prapaśya [49]
te vyathā mā (astu)–Be not bewildered; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; mama rūpam–My form; īdṛk idam ghoram–of such terrible feature; cha–and; mā (astu)–be not; vimūḍha-bhāvaḥ–bewildered. vyapeta-bhīḥ (san)–Being free of fear; prīta-manāḥ–and contented; tvam prapaśya–behold; idam–this; tat rūpam eva–four-armed form; me–of Mine; punaḥ–again. [49]
49 Be not bewildered by seeing this terrible aspect of Mine. Do not fear. Now, with a peaceful heart, behold My four-armed form once again.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
इत्यर्ज्जुनं वासुदेवस्तथोक्त्वास्वकं रूपं दर्शयामास भूयः।आश्वासयामास च भीतमेनंभूत्वा पुनः सौम्यवपुर्महात्मा ॥५०॥
sañjaya uvācha
ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvāsvakaṁ rūpaṁ darśayāmāsa bhūyaḥāśvāsayāmāsa cha bhītam enaṁbhūtvā punaḥ saumya-vapur mahātmā [50]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: uktvā–speaking; iti–thus; arjunam–to Arjuna; vāsudevaḥ–Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhūyaḥ–again; darśayāmāsa–revealed; tathā svakam rūpam–His own form; punaḥ cha–and once again; bhūtvā–appearing; mahā-ātmā–as the most merciful Śrī Kṛṣṇa; saumya-vapuḥ–of charming (human) feature, dressed in yellow as familiar to Arjuna; āśvāsayāmāsa–He pacified; enam bhītam–the fearful Arjuna. [50]
50 Sañjaya said: Speaking thus to Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa again revealed His own form. And once again, He revealed His charming personality—the most merciful Śrī Kṛṣṇa (of human feature, adorned with yellow cloth, Kaustubha jewel, and Vaijayanti garland), thus reassuring the fearful Arjuna.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
दृष्ट्वेदं मानुषं रूपं तव सौम्यं जनार्द्दनइदानीमस्मि संवृत्तः सचेताः प्रकृतिं गतः ॥५१॥
arjuna uvācha
dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ tava saumyaṁ janārdanaidānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ sa-chetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ [51]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) janārdana–O Kṛṣṇa; dṛṣṭvā–seeing; idam–this; saumyam–charming; mānuṣam–human-featured; rūpam–form; tava–of Yours; idānīm–now; sa-chetāḥ saṁvṛttaḥ–I am pacified; prakṛtim gataḥ asmi–and composed again. [51]
51 Arjuna said: O Janārdan, seeing Your beautiful form of human feature I am calm and composed once again.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
सुदुर्द्दर्शमिदं रूपं दृष्टवानसि यन्मम ।देवा अप्यस्य रूपस्य नित्यं दर्शनकाङ्क्षिणः ॥५२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
sudurdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ dṛṣṭavān asi yan mamadevā apy asya rūpasya nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ [52]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: idam rūpam–this sach-chid-ānanda form; mama–of Mine; yat–which; (tvam)–you; dṛṣṭavān asi–are seeing before you; sudurdarśam–is very rarely seen. devāḥ api–Even the demigods; nityam darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ–ever aspire for a glimpse; asya rūpasya–of this form. [52]
52 The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, it is very rare that anyone sees this My form which you now behold. Even the gods constantly aspire for a glimpse of this humanlike divine form.
नाहं वेदैर्न तपसा न दानेन न चेज्यया ।शक्य एवंविधो द्रष्टुं दृष्टवानसि यन्मम ॥५३॥
nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā na dānena na chejyayāśakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama [53]
na vedaiḥ–Neither by study of the Vedas; na tapasā–nor by severe austerities such as the Chāndrāyaṇ vow; na dānena–nor by giving land, etc. in charity; na ijyayā cha–nor by great sacrifices such as Agniṣṭoma; (kaśchit) śakyaḥ–is anyone able; draṣṭum aham–to see Me; evam-vidhaḥ mama–in this eternal form of Mine, of human features; yat–which; (tvam)–you; dṛṣṭavān asi–are seeing. [53]
53 Neither by study of the Vedas, nor by austerity, charity, and sacrifice can anyone see My eternal humanlike form of the Sweet Absolute as you see Me.
भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्य अहमेवंविधोऽर्ज्जुन ।ज्ञातुं द्रष्टुञ्च तत्त्वेन प्रवेष्टुञ्च परन्तप ॥५४॥
bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjunajñātuṁ draṣṭuñ cha tattvena praveṣṭuñ cha parantapa [54]
(he) parantapa–O conqueror of the enemy; (he) arjuna–O Arjuna; tu–yet; evam-vidhaḥ–in this form; aham śakyaḥ (asmi)–can I; jñātum–be known; tattvena–in truth; draṣṭum cha–and be seen; praveṣṭum cha–and My Pastimes be entered into; ananyayā–by exclusive; bhaktyā–devotion; (bhaktena)–by the pure devotee. [54]
54 O Arjuna, conqueror of the enemy, only by pure devotion is it possible to know Me, see Me, and enter My divine Pastimes.
मत्कर्म्मकृन्मत्परमो मद्भक्तः सङ्गवर्ज्जितः ।निर्व्वैरः सर्व्वभूतेषु यः स मामेति पाण्डव ॥५५॥
mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo mad-bhaktaḥ saṅga-varjitaḥnirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ sa mām eti pāṇḍava [55]
(he) pāṇḍava–O son of Pāṇḍu; mat-bhaktaḥ–My devotee; yaḥ–who; mat-karma-kṛt–serves Me; mat-paramaḥ–knowing Me as the supreme; (yaḥ) saṅga-varjitaḥ–giving up all attachment to material objects; nirvairaḥ–and free from enmity; sarva-bhūteṣu–towards all beings; saḥ–such a person; eti–attains; mām–Me. [55]
55 O Arjuna, My devotee who gives up all attachments and whose heart is totally free from enmity to all beings, who serves Me wholeheartedly, knowing Me as the Supreme, reaches Me.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे विश्वरूपदर्शनयोगो नामैकादशोऽध्यायः ॥११॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde viśva-rūpadarśana-yogo nāmaikādaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [11]
End of Chapter ElevenThe Vision of the Universal Formfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
द्वादशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Twelve Bhakti-yoga The Path of Devotion
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
एवं सततयुक्ता ये भक्तास्त्वां पर्य्युपासते ।ये चाप्यक्षरमव्यक्तं तेषां के योगवित्तमाः ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
evaṁ satata-yuktā ye bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsateye chāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ teṣāṁ ke yoga-vittamāḥ [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: ye bhaktāḥ–Those devotees who; evam–thus; satata-yuktāḥ–constantly with exclusive devotion; paryupāsate–worship; tvām–You, Śyāmasundar; cha api–or; ye–those who; (paryupāsate)–worship; avyaktam–the unmanifest, impersonal; akṣaram–imperishable, Brahma; teṣām–of these two types of yogīs (jñāna-yogī and bhakti-yogī); ke–who; yoga-vittamāḥ–is the best knower of yoga? [1]
1 Arjuna inquired: Of those devotees who are constantly engaged in worshipping You (as Śyāmasundar, Your original humanlike form) with exclusive devotion, and those who worship the impersonal Brahma, who is the best knower of yoga?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
मय्यावेश्य मनो ये मां नित्ययुक्ता उपासते ।श्रद्धया परयोपेतास्ते मे युक्ततमा मताः ॥२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ nitya-yuktā upāsateśraddhayā parayopetās te me yuktatamā matāḥ [2]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: ye–Those who; śraddhayā upetāḥ–with faith; parayā–transcendental to the mundane; āveśya–have absorbed; manaḥ–the mind; mayi–in thought of Me, Śyāmasundar; nitya-yuktāḥ–always engaged in exclusive devotion; (iti)–thus; upāsate–worship; mām–Me; te–they; yuktatamāḥ–are the best knowers of yoga. (iti)–This is; me–My; matāḥ–opinion. [2]
2 The Supreme Lord said: In My opinion, those who with faith in the divine are absorbed in thought of Me, Śyāmasundar, and worship Me constantly with exclusive devotion, are the superior knowers of yoga.
ये त्वक्षरमनिर्द्देश्यमव्यक्तं पर्य्युपासते ।सर्व्वत्रगमचिन्त्यञ्च कूटस्थमचलं ध्रुवम् ॥३॥
सन्नियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं सर्व्वत्र समबुद्धयः ।ते प्राप्नुवन्ति मामेव सर्व्वभूतहिते रताः ॥४॥
ye tv akṣaram anirdeśyam avyaktaṁ paryupāsatesarvatra-gam achintyañ cha kūṭastham achalaṁ dhruvam [3]
sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥte prāpnuvanti mām eva sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ [4]
ye tu–But those who; sanniyamya–fully control; indriya-grāmam–all the senses; sama-buddhayaḥ–with equanimity; sarvatra–for everything; ratāḥ–(who are) dedicated; sarva-bhūta-hite–to the welfare of all beings; (iti)–and thus; paryupāsate–worship; (me)–My; anirdeśyam–indefinable; avyaktam–unmanifest, impersonal; sarvatra-gam–all-pervading; achintyam–inconceivable; kūṭa-stham–unchanging; achalam–immovable; dhruvam–eternal; akṣaram cha–attributeless aspect of Brahma; te eva–they, too; prāpnuvanti–attain; mām–Me (as My Brahma effulgence). [3–4]
3–4 However, those who fully control their senses, who are equal-minded towards everything, who are dedicated to the welfare of all beings and thus worship My indefinable, impersonal, all-pervading, inconceivable, unchanging, immovable, eternal, attributeless aspect of Brahma—they, too, attain Me (as Brahma).
Commentary
The Lord’s statement, “The worshippers of Brahma also reach Me,” should not be misconstrued to mean that the impersonalists are on an equal footing with the devotees. The clue as to how the impersonalists can also reach Kṛṣṇa has been given in the writings of Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur.
A person may progress on the path of selfless action up to the stage of meditation, as described in the first six chapters of the Gītā. Then he may undergo great difficulty in searching for the Lord on the path of impersonalism. But when he progresses to the stage of dedicating himself to perform welfare work for others (sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ), he may get the chance to render service to a pure devotee.
For example, if one engages in the general public welfare work of opening or running a hospital, if some service is even unknowingly rendered to a devotee of the Lord, a Vaiṣṇava, one’s devotional merit begins (ajñāta-sukṛti). By association with a devotee (sādhu-saṅga), one develops faith in the divine personal form of the Lord, and automatically abandons the attempt of attaining to the impersonal Brahma.
With such faith, one takes shelter of a bona fide Guru, engages in the devotional practices based on hearing and chanting the Holy Name and glories of the Lord, and progresses on the path back to home, back to Godhead. Thus Lord Kṛṣṇa indicates: “I am the ultimate goal, and Brahma is only a relative position. It is not the final absolute, because the absolute position is Mine. Only if the impersonalists serve others they may thereby come to Me—because the only way to come to Me is through a Vaiṣṇava.”
रहूगणैतत्तपसा न यातिन चेज्यया निर्व्वपणाद्गृहाद्वा ।न च्छन्दसा नैव जलाग्निसूर्य्यैर्विना महत्पादरजोऽभिषेकम् ॥
(भा: ५/१२/१२)
rahūgaṇaitat tapasā na yātina chejyayā nirvapaṇād gṛhād vāna chchhandasā naiva jalāgni-sūryairvinā mahat-pāda-rajo ’bhiṣekam
(SB: 5.12.12)
(The sage Jaḍa Bharat said to King Rahūgaṇ:) “O Rahūgaṇ, without bathing in the dust of the holy feet (service) of the pure devotees (Mahābhāgavat Vaiṣṇavas), one cannot know the Supreme Lord by adopting the religious life of brahmacharya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, or sannyās, or by worshipping the gods of water, fire, and sun, etc.”
नैषां मतिस्तावदुरुक्रमाङ्घ्रिंस्पृशत्यनर्थापगमो यदर्थः ।महीयसां पादरजोऽभिषेकंनिष्किञ्चनानां न वृणीत यावत्
(भा: ७/५/३२)
naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁspṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad arthaḥmahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo ’bhiṣekaṁniṣkiñchanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat
(SB: 7.5.32)
(Prahlād Mahārāj said:) “As long as persons of mundane mentality have not been bathed by the dust of the feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s surrendered devotees who are free from mundane attachment, they cannot have a touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which are the destroyer of all obstacles.”
To consider that the Lord has taken the personal and impersonal aspects to be equal is a very commonly committed mistake. In reply to Arjuna’s doubt in this respect, the Lord has clearly stated that the personalists are superior to the impersonalists—yet, the impersonalists are also given a chance to reach Him, because without Him, no ultimate goal exists. Without coming to the path of devotion, the worshippers of impersonal Brahma will reach Brahma, the dazzling effulgence of the divine form of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
क्लेशोऽधिकतरस्तेषामव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम् ।अव्यक्ता हि गतिर्दुःखं देहवद्भिरवाप्यते ॥५॥
kleśo ’dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-chetasāmavyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ dehavadbhir avāpyate [5]
teṣām–For those; avyakta-āsakta-chetasām–of minds attached to the unmanifest; (bhavati)–there is; adhikataraḥ–greater; kleśaḥ–struggle; hi–as; avyaktā gatiḥ–the way of attaining the unmanifest, the impersonal Brahma; avāpyate–is attained; duḥkham–with difficulty; dehavadbhiḥ–by the embodied soul. [5]
5 Persons whose minds are attached to the impersonal Brahma must undergo a greater struggle, as the path of attaining the impersonal Brahma is difficult for the embodied soul.
ये तु सर्व्वाणि कर्म्माणि मयि सन्न्यस्य मत्पराः ।अनन्येनैव योगेन मां ध्यायन्त उपासते ॥६॥
तेषामहं समुद्धर्त्ता मृत्युसंसारसागरात् ।भवामि नचिरात्पार्थ मय्यावेशितचेतसाम् ॥७॥
ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi mayi sannyasya mat-parāḥananyenaiva yogena māṁ dhyāyanta upāsate [6]
teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarātbhavāmi na chirāt pārtha mayy āveśita-chetasām [7]
ye tu–But those who; sannyasya–offering; sarvāṇi–all; karmāṇi–actions; mayi–to Me; mat-parāḥ–taking refuge in Me; mām dhyāyantaḥ–meditating on Me; ananyena yogena eva–with exclusive devotion; upāsate–thus worship (Me); (he) pārtha–O Arjuna; aham–I; na chirāt–without delay; bhavāmi–become; samuddhartā–the deliverer; mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt–from the deathly ocean of material suffering; teṣām–of those persons; āveśita-chetasām–whose hearts are absorbed in thought; mayi–of Me. [6–7]
6–7 But those who offer all their actions to Me, take refuge in Me, their hearts absorbed in thought of Me in pure devotion and who thus worship and adore Me—O Pārtha, I swiftly deliver such dedicated souls from the deathly ocean of material suffering.
मय्येव मन आधत्स्व मयि बुद्धिं निवेशय ।निवसिष्यसि मय्येव अत ऊर्ध्वं न संशयः ॥८॥
mayy eva mana ādhatsva mayi buddhiṁ niveśayanivasiṣyasi mayy eva ata ūrdhvaṁ na saṁśayaḥ [8]
ādhatsva–Steady; manaḥ–your mind; mayi eva–in Me alone. niveśaya–Repose; buddhim–your intelligence; mayi (eva)–in Me alone. nivasiṣyasi–You will abide; mayi eva–in Me; ataḥ ūrdhvam–hereafter; na saṁśayaḥ–there is no doubt. [8]
8 So fix your mind in Me always and repose your intelligence in Me, Śyāmasundar, and you will ultimately abide in Me. Of this there is no doubt.
अथ चित्तं समाधातुं न शक्नोषि मयि स्थिरम् ।अभ्यासयोगेन ततो मामिच्छाप्तुं धनञ्जय ॥९॥
atha chittaṁ samādhātuṁ na śaknoṣi mayi sthiramabhyāsa-yogena tato mām ichchhāptuṁ dhanañjaya [9]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Arjuna; atha–if; na śaknoṣi–you are unable; samādhātum–to establish; chittam–your mind; sthiram–resolutely; mayi–in Me; tataḥ–then; ichchha–seek; āptum–to attain; mām–Me; abhyāsa-yogena–by the yoga of constant practice. [9]
9 O Dhanañjaya, and if you are unable to firmly fix your mind in Me, try to attain Me by the repeated practice of remembering Me.
अभ्यासेऽप्यसमर्थोऽसि मत्कर्म्मपरमो भव ।मदर्थमपि कर्म्माणि कुर्व्वन्सिद्धिमवाप्स्यसि ॥१०॥
abhyāse ’py asamartho ’si mat-karma-paramo bhavamad-artham api karmāṇi kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi [10]
(yadi)–If; (tvam) asi–you are; asamarthaḥ–unable; abhyāse api–to practise remembering Me, too; (tarhi)–then; mat-karma-paramaḥ bhava–concentrate on offering your actions to Me. kurvan api–Also by performing; karmāṇi–actions; mat-artham–for Me; avāpsyasi–you will attain; siddhim–perfection. [10]
10 If you cannot do that either, concentrate on offering your actions to Me. You will attain perfection through actions performed for Me.
अथैतदप्यशक्तोऽसि कर्त्तुं मद्योगमाश्रितः ।सर्व्वकर्म्मफलत्यागं ततः कुरु यतात्मवान् ॥११॥
athaitad apy aśakto ’si kartuṁ mad-yogam āśritaḥsarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ tataḥ kuru yatātmavān [11]
atha–And if; etat api–this, too; asi–is; aśaktah–not possible; kartum–to do; tataḥ–then; mat-yogam āśritah (san)–taking shelter in My yoga; yata-ātmavān (bhūtvā)–controlling your mind; sarva-karma-phala-tyāgam kuru–give up, for Me, the fruits of all your actions. [11]
11 And if you cannot do that, then resolve to give up, for Me, the fruits of your actions.
श्रेयो हि ज्ञानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाद्ध्यानं विशिष्यते ।ध्यानात्कर्म्मफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम् ॥१२॥
śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyatedhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas tyāgāch chhāntir anantaram [12]
hi–For; jñānam–Knowledge of Me; śreyaḥ–is better; abhyāsāt–than practice; dhyānam–meditation on Me; jñānāt viśiṣyate–is better than knowledge. karma-phala-tyāgaḥ–Giving up, for Me, the fruits of action; dhyānāt–comes from meditation. tyāgāt–From giving up, for Me, the fruits of action; śāntiḥ–peace ensues; anantaram–thereafter. [12]
12 For knowledge of Me is superior to mere practice, and meditation on Me is superior to knowledge alone; from meditation comes the selflessness of giving up, for Me, the fruits of action, following which peace ensues.
अद्वेष्टा सर्व्वभूतानां मैत्रः करुण एव च ।निर्म्ममो निरहङ्कारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी ॥१३॥
सन्तुष्टः सततं योगी यतात्मा दृढनिश्चयः ।मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः ॥१४॥
adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ maitraḥ karuṇa eva chanirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī [13]
santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ yogī yatātmā dṛḍha-niśchayaḥmayy-arpita-mano-buddhir yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ [14]
yaḥ–One who is; adveṣṭā–without hatred; maitraḥ–friendly; karuṇaḥ eva cha–and compassionate; sarva-bhūtānām–towards all beings; nirmamaḥ–free from possessiveness; nirahaṅkāraḥ–free from ego; sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ–equipoised in unhappy and happy circumstances; kṣamī–forgiving, tolerant; satatam santuṣṭaḥ–ever content; yogī–a yogī; yata-ātmā–self-controlled; dṛḍha-niśchayaḥ–of firm resolve; arpita-mano-buddhiḥ–who has given his mind and intelligence; mayi–to Me; saḥ–such a person is; mat-bhaktaḥ–My devotee; me priyaḥ–dear to Me. [13–14]
13–14 One who is without hatred, who is friendly and compassionate towards all, free from possessiveness and ego, equipoised in unhappy and happy circumstances, forgiving, always content, a self-controlled yogī of firm resolve who has given his mind and intelligence to Me—such a person is My devotee, and he is dear to Me.
यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्नोद्विजते च यः ।हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैर्मुक्तो यः स च मे प्रियः ॥१५॥
yasmān nodvijate loko lokān nodvijate cha yaḥharṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair mukto yaḥ sa cha me priyaḥ [15]
yasmāt–He by whom; lokaḥ–anyone; na udvijate–is not disturbed; yaḥ cha–and he who; na udvijate–is not disturbed; lokāt–by anyone; yaḥ cha–and who; muktaḥ–is free; harṣa-amarṣa-bhaya-udvegaiḥ–from elation, anger, fear, and grief; saḥ–he is; priyaḥ–dear; me–to Me. [15]
15 One who causes no disturbance to anyone and who is not disturbed by anyone, who is free from elation, anger, fear, and grief—he is dear to Me.
अनपेक्षः शुचिर्दक्ष उदासीनो गतव्यथः ।सर्व्वारम्भपरित्यागी यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः ॥१६॥
anapekṣaḥ śuchir dakṣa udāsīno gata-vyathaḥsarvārambha-parityāgī yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ [16]
yaḥ–One who is; anapekṣaḥ–without expectation; śuchiḥ–clean hearted; dakṣaḥ–able; udāsīnaḥ–impartial; gata-vyathaḥ–fearless; sarva-ārambha-parityāgī–and a renouncer of all selfish undertakings; saḥ–he is; mat-bhaktaḥ–My devotee; me priyaḥ–dear to Me. [16]
16 One who is without expectation, clean hearted, able, impartial, fearless, and a renouncer of all selfish undertakings—he is My devotee, he is dear to Me.
यो न हृष्यति न द्वेष्टि न शोचति न काङ्क्षति ।शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान्यः स मे प्रियः ॥१७॥
yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi na śochati na kāṅkṣatiśubhāśubha-parityāgī bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ [17]
yaḥ–One who is; na hṛṣyati–neither elated; na dveṣṭi–nor resentful; na śochati–neither laments any loss; na kāṅkṣati–nor hankers for the unattained; śubha-aśubha-parityāgī–a renouncer of both auspicious and inauspicious acts; yaḥ bhaktimān–and who is endowed with devotion; saḥ me priyaḥ–he is dear to Me. [17]
17 One who is neither elated nor resentful, who neither laments nor hankers as he has renounced both auspicious and inauspicious endeavours, and who is endowed with devotion—he is dear to Me.
समः शत्रौ च मित्रे च तथा मानापमानयोः ।शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु समः सङ्गविवर्ज्जितः ॥१८॥
तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिर्मौनी सन्तुष्टो येन केनचित् ।अनिकेतः स्थिरमतिर्भक्तिमान्मे प्रियो नरः ॥१९॥
samaḥ śatrau cha mitre cha tathā mānāpamānayoḥśītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu samaḥ saṅga-vivarjitaḥ [18]
tulya-nindā-stutir-maunī santuṣṭo yena kenachitaniketaḥ sthira-matir bhaktimān me priyo naraḥ [19]
(yaḥ) naraḥ–A person who; samaḥ–sees with equality; śatrau cha–an enemy; mitre cha–and a friend; tathā–and similarly; samaḥ–is equipoised; māna-apamānayoḥ–in honour and dishonour; śīta-uṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu–and in the presence of cold, heat, pleasure, and pain; saṅga-vivarjitaḥ–who has given up all attachment; tulya-nindā-stutiḥ–and who considers abuse and praise equally; maunī–who is contemplative or of controlled speech; santuṣṭaḥ–satisfied; yena kenachit–in any eventuality; aniketaḥ–who has no attachment to hearth and home; sthira-matiḥ–whose mind is peaceful; bhaktimān–and who is endowed with devotion; (saḥ) me priyaḥ–he is dear to Me. [18–19]
18–19 A person who sees with equality an enemy and friend; who is equipoised in honour and dishonour, and in the presence of cold, heat, pleasure, and pain; who has given up all attachment; who considers abuse and praise equally; who is contemplative; who is satisfied in all circumstances; who has no attachment to hearth and home; whose mind is peaceful, and who is endowed with devotion—he is dear to Me.
ये तु धर्म्मामृतमिदं यथोक्तं पर्य्युपासते ।श्रद्दधाना मत्परमा भक्तास्तेऽतीव मे प्रियाः ॥२०॥
ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ yathoktaṁ paryupāsateśraddadhānā mat-paramā bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ [20]
ye tu śraddadhānāḥ–Those faithful persons who; paryupāsate–adore and follow; idam–this; dharma-amṛtam–neatarean path; yathā-uktam–as described; mat-paramāḥ–knowing Me as the supreme goal; te bhaktāḥ–such devotees; atīva–are very; priyaḥ–dear; me–to Me. [20]
20 Those faithful devotees who, knowing Me as the supreme goal of life, wholeheartedly follow the neatarean path I have described, are very dear to Me.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे भक्तियोगो नाम द्वादशोऽध्यायः ॥१२॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvādebhākti-yogo nāma dvādaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [12]
End of Chapter TwelveThe Path of Devotionfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Thirteen Prakṛti-puruṣa-viveka-yoga Distinction Between Matter and Spirit
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
प्रकृतिं पुरुषञ्चैव क्षेत्रं क्षेत्रज्ञमेव च ।एतद्वेदितुमिच्छामि ज्ञानं ज्ञेयञ्च केशव ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
prakṛtiṁ puruṣañ chaiva kṣetraṁ kṣetrajñam eva chaetad veditum ichchhāmi jñānaṁ jñeyañ cha keśava [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) keśava–O Keśava; (aham)–I; ichchhāmi–wish; veditum–to know; etat–about these subjects: prakṛtim–material nature; puruṣam cha eva–and the person; kṣetram–the field; kṣetra-jñam eva cha–and the knower of the field; jñānam–knowledge; jñeyam cha–and the object of knowledge. [1]
1 Arjuna said: O Keśava, I would like to know about material nature, the person, the field, the knower of the field, knowledge, and the object of knowledge.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
इदं शरीरं कौन्तेय क्षेत्रमित्यभिधीयते ।एतद्यो वेत्ति तं प्राहुः क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विदः ॥२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya kṣetram ity abhidhīyateetad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ kṣetrajña iti tad vidaḥ [2]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; idam sarīram–this body; abhidhīyate iti–is called; kṣetram–kṣetra, or the field. yaḥ vetti–One who knows; etat–this field; tat vidaḥ–the learned; prāhuḥ–describe; tam–him; kṣetra-jñaḥ iti–as kṣetrajña, the knower of the field. [2]
2 The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, this body is known as the field. One who knows this field is described by the learned as the knower of the field.
क्षेत्रज्ञञ्चापि मां विद्धि सर्व्वक्षेत्रेषु भारत ।क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोर्ज्ञानं यत्तज्ज्ञानं मतं मम ॥३॥
kṣetrajñañ chāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhāratakṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama [3]
(he) bhārata–O descendant of the Bharat dynasty; api–further; cha–also; viddhi–know; mām–Me; sarva-kṣetreṣu–within all bodies; kṣetra-jñam–as kṣetrajña, the knower of the field. yat jñānam–This knowledge; kṣetra-kṣetrajñayoḥ–of the field and the knower of the field; tat jñānam–is actual knowledge; mama matam–in My opinion. [3]
3 O Bhārat, you should also know Me as the knower of all fields. This knowledge, of the field and of the knower of the field, is true knowledge, in My opinion.
तत्क्षेत्रं यच्च यादृक्च यद्विकारि यतश्च यत् ।स च यो यत्प्रभावश्च तत्समासेन मे शृणु ॥४॥
tat kṣetraṁ yach cha yādṛk cha yad vikāri yataś cha yatsa cha yo yat prabhāvaś cha tat samāsena me śṛṇu [4]
śṛṇu–Hear; me–from Me; tat samāsena–briefly; yat tat kṣetram–what that field is; cha–and; yādṛk–how is it constituted; cha–and; yat vikāri–what its transformations are; cha–and; yataḥ–wherefrom; yat–it develops; cha–and; yaḥ–who is; saḥ–that knower of the field; cha–and; yat prabhāvaḥ–what his potency is. [4]
4 Now hear from Me briefly what this field is, its constitution, transformations, causes and effects; and who the knower of the field is, and of his potency.
ऋषिभिर्बहुधा गीतं छन्दोभिर्विविधैः पृथक् ।ब्रह्मसूत्रपदैश्चैव हेतुमद्भिर्विनिश्चितैः ॥५॥
ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ chhandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthakbrahma-sūtra-padaiś chaiva hetumadbhir viniśchitaiḥ [5]
(tat)–That knowledge of kṣetra and kṣetrajña; gītam–is sung; vividhaiḥ ṛṣibhiḥ–by many types of sages; bahudhā eva–in many ways; pṛthak chhandobhiḥ–by the different Vedas; brahma-sūtra-padaiḥ–and by the aphorisms of Vedānta; viniśchitaiḥ–with conclusive; hetumadbhiḥ cha–logic. [5]
5 This has been taught in many ways by various sages, the different Vedas, and the aphorisms of the Brahma-sūtra with its conclusive logic.
महाभूतान्यहङ्कारो बुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव च ।इन्द्रियाणि दशैकञ्च पञ्च चेन्द्रियगोचराः ॥६॥
इच्छा द्वेषः सुखं दुःखं सङ्घातश्चेतना धृतिः ।एतत्क्षेत्रं समासेन सविकारमुदाहृतम् ॥७॥
mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro buddhir avyaktam eva chaindriyāṇi daśaikañ cha pañcha chendriya-gocharāḥ [6]
ichchhā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ saṅghātaś chetanā dhṛtiḥetat kṣetraṁ samāsena sa-vikāram udāhṛtam [7]
mahā-bhūtāni–The five primary elements; ahaṅkāraḥ–ego; buddhiḥ–intelligence (mahat-tattva); avyaktam eva cha–the unmanifest material nature; daśa indriyāṇi–the ten senses (the five senses of action—voice, hands, legs, anus, and genital; and the five senses of perception—eye, tongue, skin, nose, and ear); ekam cha–and the mind; pañcha cha–and the five; indriya-gocharāḥ–corresponding objects of the senses (form, taste, touch, smell, and sound); ichchhā–likes; dveṣaḥ–dislikes; sukham–happiness; duḥkham–unhappiness; saṅghātaḥ–the aggregate, the gross body; chetanā–consciousness; dhṛtiḥ–determination; etat–all these; udāhṛtam–are described; samāsena–in brief; kṣetram–as the field; sa-vikāram–with its transformations. [6–7]
6–7 The five primary elements of ether, air, fire, water, and earth; ego, intelligence, and the unmanifest material nature; the ten senses, the mind, and the five objects of the senses; likes, dislikes, happiness, unhappiness, the aggregate, consciousness, and determination—all these are summarily known as the field and its transformations.
अमानित्वमदम्भित्वमहिंसा क्षान्तिरार्ज्जवम् ।आचार्य्योपासनं शौचं स्थैर्य्यमात्मविनिग्रहः ॥८॥
इन्द्रियार्थेषु वैराग्यमनहङ्कार एव च ।जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिदुःखदोषानुदर्शनम् ॥९॥
असक्तिरनभिष्वङ्गः पुत्रदारगृहादिषु ।नित्यञ्च समचित्तत्वमिष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु ॥१०॥
मयि चानन्ययोगेन भक्तिरव्यभिचारिणी ।विविक्तदेशसेवित्वमरतिर्जनसंसदि ॥११॥
अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वं तत्त्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनम् ।एतज्ज्ञानमिति प्रोक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा ॥१२॥
amānitvam adambhitvam ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavamāchāryopāsanaṁ śauchaṁ sthairyam ātma-vinigrahaḥ [8]
indriyārtheṣu vairāgyam anahaṅkāra eva chajanma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [9]
asaktir anabhiṣv-aṅgaḥ putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣunityañ cha sama-chittatvam iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu [10]
mayi chānanya-yogena bhaktir avyabhichāriṇīvivikta-deśa-sevitvam aratir jana-saṁsadi [11]
adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ tattva-jñānārtha-darśanametaj jñānam iti proktam ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā [12]
etat jñānam–The following qualities denote knowledge: amānitvam–the quality of desirelessness for honour; adambhitvam–pridelessness; ahiṁsā–nonviolence; kṣāntiḥ–forbearance; ārjavam–straightforwardness and simplicity; āchārya-upāsanam–service to the spiritual master; śaucham–purity; sthairyam–steadiness; ātma-vinigrahaḥ–self-control; indriya-artheṣu vairāgyam–detachment from the objects of the senses; anahaṅkāraḥ eva cha–absence of egoism; duḥkha-doṣa-anudarśanam–awareness of the miseries; janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi–of birth, death, infirmity, and disease; asaktiḥ–worldly detachment; anabhiṣu-aṅgaḥ–not to dote on; putra-dāra-gṛha-ādiṣu–children, wife, home, etc.; nityam sama-chittatvam cha–constant equanimity; iṣṭa-aniṣṭa-upapattiṣu–in desirable or undesirable circumstances; cha–and; ananya-yogena–singleminded; avyabhichāriṇī–undeviating; bhaktiḥ–devotion; mayi–to Me; vivikta-deśa-sevitam–residing in a solitary place; aratiḥ–indifference; jana-saṁsadi–to mundane association; adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvam–constancy in self-knowledge; tattva-jñāna-artha-darśanam–and the vision of the goal of true knowledge; iti–thus; proktam–has been proclaimed; (ṛṣibhiḥ)–by the sages. yat–Anything; anyathā–contrary; ataḥ–to this; ajñānam–is nescience. [8–12]
8–12 Desirelessness for honour, pridelessness, nonviolence, forbearance, honesty, service to the spiritual master, purity, stability, self-control, detachment from the objects of the senses, absence of egoism, awareness of the miseries of birth, disease, old age, and death; worldly detachment, absence of doting on children, wife, home, etc., constant equanimity in desirable or undesirable circumstances, undeviating pure devotion to Me, residing in a solitary place, indifference to mundane association, constancy in self-knowledge, and the vision of the goal of true knowledge—all these qualities have been said to denote knowledge. Anything contrary to this is to be considered ignorance.
ज्ञेयं यत्तत्प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वामृतमश्नुते ।अनादिमत्परं ब्रह्म न सत्तन्नासदुच्यते ॥१३॥
jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnuteanādi mat-paraṁ brahma na sat tan nāsad uchyate [13]
(aham) pravakṣyāmi–I now describe; tat–that; yat–which; jñeyam–is the object of knowledge; jñātvā–realising; yat–which; amṛtam–the nectar of life; aśnute–is attained. tat brahma uchyate–That is known as Brahma; anādi–beginningless, eternal; mat-param–resting in Me; na sat–beyond being, beyond the material effect; na asat–and beyond non-being, beyond the material cause. [13]
13 Now I shall describe the object of knowledge, realising which one attains the nectar of life. Resting in Me, it is known as Brahma, eternal, neither being nor non-being.
सर्व्वतः पाणिपादं तत्सर्व्वतोऽक्षिशिरोमुखम् ।सर्व्वतः श्रुतिमल्लोके सर्व्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति ॥१४॥
sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat sarvato ’kṣi-śiro-mukhamsarvataḥ śrutimal loke sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati [14]
sarvataḥ–Everywhere; pāṇi-pādam–hands and feet; sarvataḥ–everywhere; akṣi-śiraḥ-mukham–eyes, heads, and mouths; sarvataḥ–everywhere; śrutimat–ears; tat–that object of knowledge; tiṣṭhati–exists; āvṛtya–pervading; sarvam–everything; loke–in the universe. [14]
14 Everywhere are His hands and feet, everywhere are His eyes, heads, mouths, and ears. He pervades the entire universe (as the Supersoul).
सर्व्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासं सर्व्वेन्द्रियविवर्ज्जितम् ।असक्तं सर्व्वभृच्चैव निर्गुणं गुणभोक्तृ च ॥१५॥
sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ sarvendriya-vivarjitamasaktaṁ sarva-bhṛch chaiva nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ cha [15]
sarva-indriya-guṇa-ābhāsam–(He) illuminates all the senses and their functions; (tad api)–yet; sarva-indriya-vivarjitam–is without (material) senses. asaktam–(Although) aloof; sarva-bhṛt cha–(He is) the maintainer of all. nirguṇam cha–(Although) transcendental to the modes of nature; guṇa-bhoktṛ eva–(He is) the Lord of all qualities. [15]
15 He illuminates all the senses and their functions, yet He is without material senses; He is completely aloof to everything, yet He is the maintainer of all (Viṣṇu); He is transcendental to the three modes of material nature, yet He is the Lord of all qualities.
बहिरन्तश्च भूतानामचरं चरमेव च ।सूक्ष्मत्वात्तदविज्ञेयं दूरस्थं चान्तिके च तत् ॥१६॥
bahir antaś cha bhūtānām acharaṁ charam eva chasūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ dūrasthaṁ chāntike cha tat [16]
tat–That knowable is; bahiḥ cha–outside; antaḥ–and inside; acharam–stationary; charam eva cha–and moving; bhūtānām–beings. sūkṣmatvāt–Due to subtlety; tat–that; avijñeyam–is difficult to comprehend; antike cha–near; dūra-stham cha–yet far. [16]
16 He is situated within and without all moving and stationary beings, near yet far, subtle, and therefore most difficult to comprehend.
अविभक्तञ्च भूतेषु विभक्तमिव च स्थितम् ।भूतभर्त्तृ च तज्ज्ञेयं ग्रसिष्णु प्रभविष्णु च ॥१७॥
avibhaktañ cha bhūteṣu vibhaktam iva cha sthitambhūta-bhartṛ cha taj jñeyaṁ grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu cha [17]
tat avibhaktam–That indivisible; sthitam–appears; vibhaktam iva cha–as divided; bhūteṣu–in the living beings. (tat eva)–He; jñeyam–is to be known; prabha-viṣṇu cha–as the manifestor; bhūta-bhartṛ cha–the maintainer; grasiṣṇu cha–and the devourer. [17]
17 Although indivisible, He appears as divided in all beings. He is to be known as the one who manifests, maintains, and devours all beings.
ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिस्तमसः परमुच्यते ।ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सर्व्वस्य धिष्ठितम् ॥१८॥
jyotiṣām api taj jyotis tamasaḥ param uchyatejñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ hṛdi sarvasya dhiṣṭhitam [18]
tat–He; uchyate–is said to be; jyotiḥ–the illuminator; jyotiṣām api–of the luminaries; param–beyond; tamasaḥ–the darkness; (tat eva)–He is; jñānam–knowledge; jñeyam–the object of knowledge; jñāna-gamyam–reached by knowledge (verses 8–12); dhiṣṭhitam–situated as the Supersoul; hṛdi–within the hearts; sarvasya–of all. [18]
18 He is known as the illuminator of the luminaries, beyond darkness. Situated in the hearts of all beings, He is knowledge, the object of knowledge, reached by knowledge.
इति क्षेत्रं तथा ज्ञानं ज्ञेयञ्चोक्तुं समासतः ।मद्भक्त एतद्विज्ञाय मद्भावायोपपद्यते ॥१९॥
iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ jñeyañ choktuṁ samāsataḥmad-bhakta etad vijñāya mad-bhāvāyopapadyate [19]
iti–Thus; kṣetram–the field; jñānam–knowledge; jñeyam cha–and the object of knowledge (the Lord in His aspects of Brahma, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān); tathā uktam–are described; samāsataḥ–in brief. etat vijñāya–Realising this; mat-bhaktaḥ–My devotee; upapadyate–attains; mat-bhāvāya–love for Me. [19]
19 The field, knowledge, and the object of knowledge have been briefly described by Me. Realising these truths, My devotee attains love for Me.
प्रकृतिं पुरुषञ्चैव विद्ध्यनादी उभावपि ।विकारांश्च गुणांश्चैव विद्धि प्रकृतिसम्भवान् ॥२०॥
prakṛtiṁ puruṣañ chaiva viddhy anādī ubhāv apivikārāṁś cha guṇāṁś chaiva viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān [20]
viddhi–Know; ubhau api–both; prakṛtim–nature—māyā; puruṣam cha–and the jīvātma, individual soul, described as ‘knower of the field’; anādī eva–to be beginningless. viddhi–Know; vikārān cha–the transformations—body, senses, and their functions; guṇān eva cha–and the transformations of the modes of nature, as happiness, unhappiness, sorrow, and delusion, etc.; prakṛti-sambhavān–as born of material nature. [20]
20 Know that both material nature (māyā) and the person (individual soul) are beginningless, and know that the transformations (body, senses, and their functions) and the transformations of the modes of nature (such as pleasure, pain, sorrow, and delusion) are born of material nature.
कार्य्यकारणकर्त्तृत्वे हेतुः प्रकृतिरुच्यते ।पुरुषः सुखदुःखानां भोक्तृत्वे हेतुरुच्यते ॥२१॥
kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve hetuḥ prakṛtir uchyatepuruṣaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ bhoktṛtve hetur uchyate [21]
prakṛtiḥ–Material nature (with the presence of puruṣ); uchyate–is said to be; hetuḥ–the cause; kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve–via the presiding demigods of the senses, of the production of the effect, as the body, and of the cause, as the senses. puruṣaḥ–The person—jīva; uchyate–is said to be; hetuḥ–the cause; bhoktṛtve–of the state of being an enjoyer or a sufferer; sukha-duḥkhānām–of happiness and unhappiness. [21]
21 Material nature is said to be the cause of the production of effect (the body) and cause (the senses); the person (in material bondage) is said to be the cause of the condition of being an enjoyer or a sufferer of happiness and unhappiness.
पुरुषः प्रकृतिस्थो हि भुङ्क्ते प्रकृतिजान्गुणान् ।कारणं गुणसङ्गोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु ॥२२॥
puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇānkāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu [22]
prakṛti-sthaḥ–Situated within (the body which is an effect of) material nature; puruṣaḥ hi–a person; bhuṅkte–enjoys; guṇān–the modes; prakṛti-jān–born of material nature. guṇa-saṅgaḥ–Attachment to the modes (as body, senses, etc.); (bhavati)–is; kāraṇam–the cause; asya–of that person’s; sat-asat-yoni-janmasu–births in higher and lower species. [22]
22 Being situated within material nature, a person enjoys the modes born of material nature. His attachment to these modes is the cause of his repeated births in higher and lower species.
उपद्रष्टानुमन्ता च भर्त्ता भोक्ता महेश्वरः ।परमात्मेति चाप्युक्तो देहेऽस्मिन्पुरुषः परः ॥२३॥
upadraṣṭānumantā cha bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥparamātmeti chāpy ukto dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ [23]
paraḥ puruṣaḥ–The Supreme Person; upadraṣṭā–witness; anumantā–sanctioner; bhartā–support; bhoktā–maintainer; mahā-īśvaraḥ cha–and Supreme Lord; asmin dehe–within this body; api uktaḥ–is also described; iti cha–as; paramātmā–Paramātmā, the Supersoul. [23]
23 The Supreme Person—the witness, sanctioner, support, guardian, and almighty Lord within this body, is known as Paramātmā, the Supersoul.
य एवं वेत्ति पुरुषं प्रकृतिञ्च गुणैः सह ।सर्व्वथा वर्त्तमानोऽपि न स भूयोऽभिजायते ॥२४॥
ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ prakṛtiñ cha guṇaiḥ sahasarvathā vartamāno ’pi na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate [24]
yaḥ–One who; evam vetti–thus knows; puruṣam–the Supreme Person; prakṛtim cha–and material nature; guṇaiḥ saha–with its modes; saḥ–he; vartamānaḥ api–though present; sarvathā–in any situation; na abhijāyate–is not born; bhūyaḥ–again. [24]
24 Thus, one who truly knows the Supreme Person and material nature with its modes, will never in any circumstances have to take birth again.
ध्यानेनात्मनि पश्यन्ति केचिदात्मानमात्मना ।अन्ये साङ्ख्ये न योगेन कर्म्मयोगेन चापरे ॥२५॥
dhyānenātmani paśyanti kechid ātmānam ātmanāanye sāṅkhyena yogena karma-yogena chāpare [25]
kechit–Some; paśyanti–see; dhyānena–by meditation; ātmanā–by the pure consciousness; ātmānam–the Supersoul; ātmani–within the heart; anye–others; sāṅkhyena yogena–by sāṅkhya-yoga; apare cha–and yet others; karma-yogena–by karma-yoga. [25]
25 With their pure consciousness, some persons see the Supersoul within the heart, in their meditation. Others perceive Him through enlightenment, and yet others by the yoga of selfless action.
अन्ये त्वेवमजानन्तः श्रुत्वान्येभ्य उपासते ।तेऽपि चातितरन्त्येव मृत्युं श्रुतिपरायणाः ॥२६॥
anye tv evam ajānantaḥ śrutvānyebhya upāsatete ’pi chātitaranty eva mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ [26]
anye tu–Yet others; ajānantaḥ–not knowing; evam–of all these methods; upāsate–worship; śrutvā–by hearing; anyebhyaḥ–from others. te api–They too; śruti-parāyaṇāḥ (santaḥ)–when their faith is deepened by hearing; atitaranti eva–surpass; mṛtyum cha–death. [26]
26 Further, there are those who, not knowing of these methods, engage in worship by hearing the scriptures. When their faith is deepened by such hearing, they, too, surpass the mortal plane.
यावत्सञ्जायते किञ्चित्सत्त्वं स्थावरजङ्गमम् ।क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात्तद्विद्धि भरतर्षभ ॥२७॥
yāvat sañjāyate kiñchit sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamamkṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt tad viddhi bharatarṣabha [27]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O best of the Bharat dynasty; yāvat kiñchit–whatever; sthāvara-jaṅgamam–stationary or moving; sattvam–being; sañjayate–is born; viddhi–know; tat–that; kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt–as born of the combination of the field and its knower. [27]
27 O Arjuna, best of the Bhāratas, whatever is born in the world, whether moving or stationary, know it to be manifest from the combination of the field and its knower.
समं सर्व्वेषु भूतेषु तिष्ठन्तं परमेश्वरम् ।विनश्यत्स्वविनश्यन्तं यः पश्यति स पश्यति ॥२८॥
samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaramvinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati [28]
yaḥ–One who; paśyati–sees; parama-īśvaram–the Supreme Lord; tiṣṭhantam–situated; samam–equally; sarveṣu bhūteṣu–in all beings; avinaśyantam–as the imperishable; vinaśyatsu–within the perishable; saḥ–such a person; paśyati–sees perfectly. [28]
28 One who sees the Supreme Lord situated equally within all beings as the imperishable within the perishable—such a person sees perfectly.
समं पश्यन्हि सर्व्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम् ।न हिनस्त्यात्मनात्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥२९॥
samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra samavasthitam īśvaramna hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ tato yāti parāṁ gatim [29]
(saḥ) hi–Such a person; paśyan–by seeing; samam–with equality; īśvaram–the Lord; samavasthitam–dwelling alike; sarvatra–in every place; na hinasti–does not deceive, deprive; ātmānam–himself; ātmanā–by himself; tataḥ–and therefore; yāti–attains; parām gatim–the supreme destination. [29]
29 Such a person with the vision of equality, seeing the Lord dwelling in every place alike, does not deceive himself, and thus he attains the supreme destination.
प्रकृत्यैव च कर्म्माणि क्रियमाणानि सर्व्वशः ।यः पश्यति तथात्मानमकर्त्तारं स पश्यति ॥३०॥
prakṛtyaiva cha karmāṇi kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥyaḥ paśyati tathātmānam akartāraṁ sa paśyati [30]
cha–And; yaḥ–he who; paśyati–sees; tathā–that; sarvaśaḥ–all; karmāṇi–actions; kriyamāṇāni–are brought about; eva–only; prakṛtyā–by material nature; saḥ–such a person; paśyati–sees; ātmānam–himself; akartāram–as non-doer. [30]
30 He who sees that all actions are brought about only by material nature, sees himself as non-doer.
यदा भूतपृथग्भावमेकस्थमनुपश्यति ।तत एव च विस्तारं ब्रह्म सम्पद्यते तदा ॥३१॥
yadā bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam eka-stham anupaśyatitata eva cha vistāraṁ brahma sampadyate tadā [31]
yadā–When; (saḥ)–such a seer; anupaśyati–can see; bhūta-pṛthak-bhāvam–the different types of beings; eka-stham–situated in the one nature; cha–and; (bhūtānām) vistāram–the projection of all beings; tataḥ eva–from that nature; tadā–then; brahma sampadyate–the state of Brahma is reached. [31]
31 When such an enlightened person realises that the different types of beings are situated within the one nature and that all are made manifest from that nature, he attains realisation of Brahma.
अनादित्वान्निर्गुणत्वात्परमात्मायमव्ययः ।शरीरस्थोऽपि कौन्तेय न करोति न लिप्यते ॥३२॥
anāditvān nirguṇatvāt paramātmāyam avyayaḥśarīra-stho ’pi kaunteya na karoti na lipyate [32]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; anāditvāt–because of eternality; nirguṇatvāt–and being transcendental to the material modes; avyayaḥ–and inexhaustible; ayam–the; paramātmā–Supersoul; śarīra-sthaḥ api–although present within the field; na karoti–neither acts; na lipyate–nor is affected by any action. [32]
32 O Arjuna, since the Supersoul is beginningless, transcendental, and inexhaustible, although also present within the field (with the individual soul), He neither acts nor is affected by any action.
यथा सर्व्वगतं सौक्ष्म्यादाकाशं नोपलिप्यते ।सर्व्वत्रावस्थितो देहे तथात्मा नोपलिप्यते ॥३३॥
yathā sarva-gataṁ saukṣmyād ākāśaṁ nopalipyatesarvatrāvasthito dehe tathātmā nopalipyate [33]
yathā–As; sarva-gatam–the all-pervading; ākāśam–space; na upalipyate–is not tainted by anything, is untouched; saukṣmyāt–due to its subtleness; tathā–similarly; ātmā–ātma, the soul; avasthitaḥ–situated; sarvatra–pervading; dehe–the body; na upalipyate–is not tainted or touched. [33]
33 As the most subtle element of space pervades everything yet is not tainted by anything, similarly, the soul, though pervading the body, is not tainted by it.
यथा प्रकाशयत्येकः कृत्स्नं लोकमिमं रविः ।क्षेत्रं क्षेत्री तथा कृत्स्नं प्रकाशयति भारत ॥३४॥
yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ kṛtsnaṁ lokam imaṁ raviḥkṣetraṁ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaṁ prakāśayati bhārata [34]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; yathā–as; ekaḥ–the one; raviḥ–sun; prakāśayati–illuminates; imam–this; kṛtsnam–entire; lokam–world; tathā–similarly; kṣetrī–the occupier of the field; prakāśayati–illuminates; kṛtsnam–the entire; kṣetram–field. [34]
34 O Bhārat, as the one sun illuminates the entire world, the occupier of the field illuminates the entire field.
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोरेवमन्तरं ज्ञानचक्षुषा ।भूतप्रकृतिमोक्षञ्च ये विदुर्यान्ति ते परम् ॥३५॥
kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor evam antaraṁ jñāna-chakṣuṣābhūta-prakṛti-mokṣañ cha ye vidur yānti te param [35]
ye–Those who; jñāna-chakṣuṣā–through the eyes of knowledge; evam viduḥ–can thus know; antaram–the distinction; kṣetra-kṣetrajñayoḥ–between the field and its knower; cha–and (can thus know); bhūta-prakṛti-mokṣam–the way of liberation of the living beings from material nature; te–they; yānti–attain; param–the Supreme. [35]
35 Those who, through the eyes of knowledge, can thus distinguish between the field and the knower of the field, and who can thus know the path of liberation of the living beings from material nature—such persons attain the Supreme.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे प्रकृतिपुरुषविवेकयोगो नाम त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः ॥१३॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde prakṛti-puruṣa-viveka-yogo nāma trayodaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [13]
End of Chapter ThirteenDistinction between Matter and Spiritfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
चतुर्द्दशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Fourteen Guṇatraya-vibhāga-yoga The Three Divisions of Material Nature
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
परं भूयः प्रवक्ष्यामि ज्ञानानां ज्ञानमुत्तमम् ।यज्ज्ञात्वा मुनयः सर्व्वे परां सिद्धिमितो गताः ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamamyaj jñātvā munayaḥ sarve parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: bhūyaḥ–Again; (aham) pravakṣyāmi–I shall speak; param–the supreme; jñānam–knowledge, teaching; uttamam–the highest; jñānānām–of all fields of knowledge; jñātvā–knowing; yat–which; sarve–all; munayaḥ–the sages; gatāḥ–attained; parām–ultimate; siddhim–perfection; itaḥ–beyond this mundane plane. [1]
1 The Supreme Lord said: Again, I shall describe to you the supreme teaching, the highest of all fields of knowledge, knowing which the sages attained the ultimate perfection beyond this mundane plane.
इदं ज्ञानमुपाश्रित्य मम साधर्म्म्यमागताः ।सर्गेऽपि नोपजायन्ते प्रलये न व्यथन्ति च ॥२॥
idaṁ jñānam upāśritya mama sādharmyam āgatāḥsarge ’pi nopajāyante pralaye na vyathanti cha [2]
upāśritya–Taking refuge in; idam–this; jñānam–knowledge; (jīvaḥ)–the living being; āgatāḥ (santaḥ)–attaining; sādharmyam–the same (spiritual) nature; mama–as Mine; na upajāyante–is neither born; sarge api–in the universal manifestation; na vyathanti–nor suffers; pralaye cha–in the universal dissolution. [2]
2 By taking refuge in this knowledge, the soul attains to My nature. Then he is neither born in the cosmic manifestation, nor does he suffer (death) in the cosmic dissolution.
मम योनिर्महद्ब्रह्म तस्मिन्गर्भं दधाम्यहम् ।सम्भवः सर्व्वभूतानां ततो भवति भारत ॥३॥
mama yonir mahad-brahma tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy ahamsambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ tato bhavati bhārata [3]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; mahat-brahma–primordial matter; mama yoniḥ–is My place of impregnation; tasmin–into which; aham–I; dadhāmi–cast; garbham–the seed. tataḥ–From there; sambhavaḥ–the birth; sarva-bhūtānām–of all living beings; bhavati–occurs. [3]
3 O Bhārat, I place the seed within My womb of primordial matter from which all living beings take birth.
सर्व्वयोनिषु कौन्तेय मूर्त्तयः सम्भवन्ति याः ।तासां ब्रह्म महद्योनिरहं बीजप्रदः पिता ॥४॥
sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥtāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [4]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; yāḥ mūrtayaḥ–of all forms which; sambhavanti–are born; sarva-yoniṣu–of the wombs of all species; tāsām–their; yoniḥ–womb; mahat brahma–is primordial matter; aham–and I; bīja-pradaḥ–the seed-giving; pitā–father. [4]
4 O Kaunteya, primordial matter is the original womb of all life-forms that are born of the wombs of all species, and I am the seed-giving father.
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति गुणाः प्रकृतिसम्भवाः ।निबध्नन्ति महाबाहो देहे देहिनमव्ययम् ॥५॥
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥnibadhnanti mahā-bāho dehe dehinam avyayam [5]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty hero; guṇāḥ–the qualities; sattvam rajaḥ tamaḥ iti–known as goodness, passion, and ignorance; prakṛti-sambhavāḥ–manifest from material nature; nibadhnanti–bind; avyayam–the immutable; dehinam–resident of the body; dehe–within the body. [5]
5 O mighty hero, Arjuna, the three modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance, born of material nature, bind the immutable spirit soul within the body.
तत्र सत्त्वं निर्म्मलत्वात्प्रकाशकमनामयम् ।सुखसङ्गेन बध्नाति ज्ञानसङ्गेन चानघ ॥६॥
tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt prakāśakam anāmayamsukha-saṅgena badhnāti jñāna-saṅgena chānagha [6]
(he) anagha–O sinless one; tatra–among these three; nirmalatvāt–due to purity; sattvam–the mode of goodness; prakāśakam–illuminating; anāmayam–and wholesome; badhnāti–binds; (dehinam)–the embodied living being; sukha-saṅgena–with happiness; jñāna-saṅgena cha–and knowledge. [6]
6 O sinless one, of these three modes, due its purity, the mode of goodness is illuminating and wholesome, conditioning one to happiness and knowledge.
रजो रागात्मकं विद्धि तृष्णासङ्गसमुद्भवम् ।तन्निबध्नाति कौन्तेय कर्म्मसङ्गेन देहिनम् ॥७॥
rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavamtan nibadhnāti kaunteya karma-saṅgena dehinam [7]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; viddhi–know; rajaḥ–the mode of passion; rāga-ātmakam–as the embodiment of desire; tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam–born of hankering and attachment. tat–That rajo-guṇa mode of passion; nibadhnāti–binds; dehinam–the embodied; karma-saṅgena–by action. [7]
7 O son of Kuntī, know the mode of passion to be the embodiment of desire. Born of hankering and attachment, it conditions one to action.
तमस्त्वज्ञानजं विद्धि मोहनं सर्व्वदेहिनाम् ।प्रमादालस्यनिद्राभिस्तन्निबध्नाति भारत ॥८॥
tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi mohanaṁ sarva-dehināmpramādālasya-nidrābhis tan nibadhnāti bhārata [8]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; viddhi tu–and know; tamaḥ–the mode of ignorance; ajñāna-jam–born of darkness; mohanam–the delusion; sarva-dehinām–of all the embodied beings; tat–that; nibadhnāti–binds; (dehinam)–the living being; pramāda-ālasya-nidrābhiḥ–with delusion, laziness, and sleep. [8]
8 And, O Bhārat, know the mode of ignorance, born of darkness, to be the ignorance of all the embodied beings, conditioning them to delusion, laziness, and slumber.
सत्त्वं सुखे सञ्जयति रजः कर्म्मणि भारत ।ज्ञानमावृत्य तु तमः प्रमादे सञ्जयत्युत ॥९॥
sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati rajaḥ karmaṇi bhāratajñānam āvṛtya tu tamaḥ pramāde sañjayaty uta [9]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; sattvam–the mode of goodness; sañjayati–dominates; (dehinam)–the embodied living being; sukhe–with happiness; rajaḥ–and the mode of passion; karmaṇi–with action; tu–but; tamaḥ–the mode of ignorance; āvṛtya–covering; jñānam–knowledge; sañjayati uta–binds one; pramāde–with illusion. [9]
9 O Arjuna, the mode of goodness conditions the embodied being to happiness, and the mode of passion conditions him to action. But the mode of ignorance covers his knowledge and traps him in illusion.
रजस्तमश्चाभिभूय सत्त्वं भवति भारत ।रजः सत्त्वं तमश्चैव तमः सत्त्वं रजस्तथा ॥१०॥
rajas tamaś chābhibhūya sattvaṁ bhavati bhāratarajaḥ sattvaṁ tamaś chaiva tamaḥ sattvaṁ rajas tathā [10]
(he) bhārata–O Arjuna; sattvam–the mode of goodness; bhavati–appears; abhibhūya–defeating; rajaḥ tamaḥ cha–the modes of passion and ignorance. rajaḥ–The mode of passion; (bhavati)–appears; (abhibhūya)–defeating; sattvam tamaḥ eva cha–goodness and ignorance too. tathā–Similarly; tamaḥ–ignorance; (abhibhūya bhavati)–defeats; sattvam rajaḥ–goodness and passion. [10]
10 O Bhārat, goodness overcomes passion and ignorance, passion overcomes goodness and ignorance, and ignorance overcomes goodness and passion. Each mode in turn defeats the others in an unending battle for supremacy.
सर्व्वद्वारेषु देहेऽस्मिन्प्रकाश उपजायते ।ज्ञानं यदा तदा विद्याद्विवृद्धं सत्त्वमित्युत ॥११॥
sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin prakāśa upajāyatejñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta [11]
yadā–When; prakāśaḥ–illumination; jñānam–of knowledge; upajāyate–appears; sarva-dvāreṣu–in the gateways (the senses); asmin dehe–of this body; tadā–then; vidyāt iti uta–know by that symptom; sattvam–the mode of goodness; vivṛddham–has increased. [11]
11 When the gateways of the body are illuminated with knowledge, know this to be the manifestation of the mode of goodness.
लोभः प्रवृत्तिरारम्भः कर्म्मणामशमः स्पृहा ।रजस्येतानि जायन्ते विवृद्धे भरतर्षभ ॥१२॥
lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhārajasy etāni jāyante vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha [12]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O most noble of the Bharat dynasty; rajasi vivṛddhe–with a predominance of the mode of passion; etāni–all these symptoms; jāyante–are manifest: lobhaḥ–greed; pravṛttiḥ–exertion; ārambhaḥ–undertaking; karmaṇām–of activities; aśamaḥ–unrest; spṛhā–and hankering. [12]
12 O Arjuna, most noble of the Bharat dynasty, know that when the mode of passion predominates in a person, greed, exertion, undertaking of activities, unrest, and hankering become manifest.
अप्रकाशोऽप्रवृत्तिश्च प्रमादो मोह एव च ।तमस्येतानि जायन्ते विवृद्धे कुरुनन्दन ॥१३॥
aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś cha pramādo moha eva chatamasy etāni jāyante vivṛddhe kuru-nandana [13]
(he) kuru-nandana–O descendant of Kuru; tamasi vivṛddhe–by the force of the mode of ignorance; etāni–all these symptoms; jāyante–are manifest: aprakāśaḥ–dullness; apravṛttiḥ cha–inactivity; pramādaḥ–delusion; mohaḥ eva cha–and bewilderment. [13]
13 O Kuru Nandan, by the influence of the mode of ignorance, all the symptoms of dullness, inactivity, delusion, and bewilderment become manifest.
यदा सत्त्वे प्रवृद्धे तु प्रलयं याति देहभृत् ।तदोत्तमविदां लोकानमलान्प्रतिपद्यते ॥१४॥
yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛttadottama-vidāṁ lokān amalān pratipadyate [14]
yadā–When; deha-bhṛt–the embodied; pravṛddhe (sati)–having developed; sattve–goodness; yāti–reaches; pralayam–death; tadā tu–then; amalān–the pure; lokān–planes; uttama-vidām–of persons of higher knowledge (worshippers of Hiraṇyagarbha [Brahmā], etc.); pratipadyate–are attained. [14]
14 If a person dies in a state of the mode of goodness, he goes to the pure planes where those who have higher knowledge reside.
रजसि प्रलयं गत्वा कर्म्मसङ्गिषु जायते ।तथा प्रलीनस्तमसि मूढयोनिषु जायते ॥१५॥
rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā karma-saṅgiṣu jāyatetathā pralīnas tamasi mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate [15]
(jīvaḥ) pralayam gatvā–When a person dies; rajasi (pravṛddhe)–with a predominance of the mode of passion; jāyate–he is born; karma-saṅgiṣu–as a human attached to action. tathā–Similarly; pralīnaḥ (san)–dying; tamasi (vivṛddhe)–when the mode of ignorance predominates; jāyate–one takes birth; mūḍha-yoniṣu–in the lower species. [15]
15 When a person dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth as a human attached to worldly activity. If one dies in the mode of ignorance, he takes birth in the lower species.
कर्म्मणः सुकृतस्याहुः सात्त्विकं निर्म्मलं फलम् ।रजसस्तु फलं दुःखमज्ञानं तमसः फलम् ॥१६॥
karmaṇaḥ sukṛtasyāhuḥ sāttvikaṁ nirmalaṁ phalamrajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham ajñānaṁ tamasaḥ phalam [16]
(paṇḍitāḥ)–The learned; āhuḥ–proclaim; phalam–the fruit; sukṛtasya karmaṇaḥ–of good works; nirmalam–is pure; sāttvikam–and of the nature of goodness; tu phalam–and the fruit; rajasaḥ–of passionate action; duḥkham–is sorrow; phalam (cha)–and the fruit; tamasaḥ–of ignorant action; ajñānam–is ignorance. [16]
16 It is said by the learned that good actions result in purity, passionate actions result in sorrow, and ignorant actions lead to darkness.
सत्त्वात्सञ्जायते ज्ञानं रजसो लोभ एव च ।प्रमादमोहौ तमसो भवतोऽज्ञानमेव च ॥१७॥
sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ rajaso lobha eva chapramāda-mohau tamaso bhavato ’jñānam eva cha [17]
sattvāt–From goodness; jñānam–knowledge; cha eva–and; rajasaḥ–from passion; lobhaḥ–greed; sañjayate–is born; tamasaḥ (cha)–and from ignorance; pramāda-mohau–delusion and bewilderment; bhavataḥ–arise; ajñānam eva cha–and a lack of knowledge; (bhavati)–ensues. [17]
17 From the mode of goodness, knowledge arises; from the mode of passion, greed; and from the mode of ignorance, delusion, bewilderment, and a lack of knowledge ensue.
ऊर्ध्वं गच्छन्ति सत्त्वस्था मध्ये तिष्ठन्ति राजसाः ।जघन्यगुणवृत्तिस्था अधो गच्छन्ति तामसाः ॥१८॥
ūrdhvaṁ gachchhanti sattva-sthā madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥjaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gachchhanti tāmasāḥ [18]
sattva-sthāḥ–Persons situated in the mode of goodness; gachchhanti–go; ūrdhvam–up (to Satyaloka). rājasāḥ–Those in the mode of passion; tiṣṭhanti–remain; madhye–in the middle (as humans). tāmasāḥ–Persons in the mode of ignorance; jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthāḥ–tending to lower qualities; gachchhanti–go; adhaḥ–down (suffer). [18]
18 Persons in goodness ascend (up to Satyaloka), those in passion remain in the middle (as humans), and the unfortunate, ignorant persons fall to the lower planes (of suffering).
नान्यं गुणेभ्यः कर्त्तारं यदा द्रष्टानुपश्यति ।गुणेभ्यश्च परं वेत्ति मद्भावं सोऽधिगच्छति ॥१९॥
nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ kartāraṁ yadā draṣṭānupaśyatiguṇebhyaś cha paraṁ vetti mad-bhāvaṁ so ’dhigachchhati [19]
yadā–When; draṣṭā–the living being, the witness; anupaśyati–sees; na anyam–nothing else; guṇebhyaḥ–but the three modes of nature; kartāram–as the doer; cha–and; vetti–is able to know; param–the Lord, transcendental; guṇebhyaḥ–to the modes; (tadā)–then; saḥ–he; adhigachchhati–attains; mat-bhāvam–My nature (My bhāva-bhakti). [19]
19 When a person sees the three modes to be the only impetus of this world, and knows the Supreme Lord, transcendental to the modes, then he comes to love Me with devotion.
गुणानेतानतीत्य त्रीन्देही देहसमुद्भवान् ।जन्ममृत्युजरादुःखैर्विमुक्तोऽमृतमश्नुते ॥२०॥
guṇān etān atītya trīn dehī deha-samudbhavānjanma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute [20]
dehī–The embodied living being; atītya–transcending; etān trīn guṇān–these three modes of nature; deha-samudbhavān–that appear in the body; vimuktaḥ (san)–being liberated; janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhaiḥ–from the miseries of birth, death, and old age; aśnute–knows the joy of; amṛtam–immortality, love transcendental (nirguṇa prema). [20]
20 Transcending these modes manifest in the body, he is liberated from the miseries of birth, death, and old age, and knows the joy of immortality.
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
कैर्लिङ्गैस्त्रीन्गुणानेतानतीतो भवति प्रभो ।किमाचारः कथं चैतांस्त्रीन्गुणानतिवर्त्तते ॥२१॥
arjuna uvācha
kair liṅgais trīn guṇān etān atīto bhavati prabhokim āchāraḥ kathaṁ chaitāṁs trīn guṇān ativartate [21]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) prabho–O Lord; kaiḥ liṅgaiḥ–by what symptoms; bhavati (jñeyaḥ)–can be known; atītaḥ–a person who has transcended; etān–these; trīn–three; guṇān–modes? kim āchāraḥ–How does he behave? katham cha–and how; ativartate–does he transcend; etān–these; trīn guṇān–three modes? [21]
21 Arjuna said: O Lord, what are the symptoms of a person transcendental to these three modes of material nature? How does he behave, and how does he transcend the modes?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
प्रकाशञ्च प्रवृत्तिञ्च मोहमेव च पाण्डव ।न द्वेष्टि सम्प्रवृत्तानि न निवृत्तानि काङ्क्षति ॥२२॥
उदासीनवदासीनो गुणैर्यो न विचाल्यते ।गुणा वर्त्तन्त इत्येवं योऽवतिष्ठति नेङ्गते ॥२३॥
समदुःखसुखः स्वस्थः समलोष्ट्राश्मकाञ्चनः ।तुल्यप्रियाप्रियो धीरस्तुल्यनिन्दात्मसंस्तुतिः ॥२४॥
मानापमानयोस्तुल्यस्तुल्यो मित्रारिपक्षयोः ।सर्व्वारम्भपरित्यागी गुणातीतः स उच्यते ॥२५॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
prakāśañ cha pravṛttiñ cha moham eva cha pāṇḍavana dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati [22]
udāsīnavad āsīno guṇair yo na vichālyateguṇā vartanta ity evaṁ yo ’vatiṣṭhati neṅgate [23]
sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ svasthaḥ sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñchanaḥtulya-priyāpriyo dhīras tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ [24]
mānāpamānayos tulyas tulyo mitrāri-pakṣayoḥsarvārambha-parityāgī guṇātītaḥ sa uchyate [25]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord replied: (he) pāṇḍava–O son of Pāṇḍu; yaḥ–one who; na dveṣṭi–neither resents; prakāśaṁ cha–illumination (the effect of goodness); pravṛttim cha–activation (the effect of passion); moham eva cha–and delusion (the effect of ignorance); sampravṛttāni–when they appear; na kāṅkṣati–nor hankers for them; nivṛttāni–when they disappear; yaḥ–one who; āsīnaḥ (san)–remaining; udāsīnavat–as unconcerned; na vichālyate–is not perturbed; gunaiḥ–by the modes; avatiṣṭhati–remains poised; na iṅgate–without wavering; iti evam (jñātvā)–knowing that; guṇāḥ–the modes; vartate–are engaged in their functions; (yaḥ)–one who; sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ–is equipoised in happiness and unhappiness; svasthaḥ–is situated within the self; sama-loṣṭra-aśma-kāñchanaḥ–with the vision of equality towards earth, stone, or gold; tulya-priya-apriyaḥ–equipoised in desirable and undesirable circumstances; dhīraḥ–wise; tulya-nindā-ātma-saṁstutiḥ–balanced with regard to abuse and praise; tulyaḥ māna-apamānayoḥ–balanced in honour and dishonour; tulyaḥ–balanced; mitra-ari-pakṣayoḥ–toward friend and foe; sarva-ārambha-parityāgī–and is a renouncer of all mundane endeavours; saḥ–that person; uchyate–is described; guṇa-atītaḥ–as transcendental to the modes of material nature. [22–25]
22–25 The Supreme Lord replied: O Pāṇḍava, it is said that a person who has transcended the three modes of material nature neither resents illumination, activation, and delusion when they appear, nor does he hanker for them when they withdraw. Poised in the knowledge that the modes are engaging, he is not distracted by them; he remains unperturbed, unconcerned. Remaining self-satisfied, he sees joy and sorrow equally; he sees earth, rock, or gold with the vision of equality; he is wise, equipoised in desirable and undesirable circumstances, abuse and praise, honour and dishonour; he behaves fairly with friend and foe alike, and he renounces all mundane endeavours.
माञ्च योऽव्यभिचारेण भक्तियोगेन सेवते ।स गुणान्समतीत्यैतान्ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ॥२६॥
māñ cha yo ’vyabhichāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevatesa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [26]
yaḥ–One who; bhakti-yogena–by the yoga of devotion; avyabhichāreṇa–without deviation; sevate–renders service; mām cha–unto Me (the Supreme Lord Śyāmasundar); saḥ–that person; samatītya–transcending; etān–these; guṇān–modes; kalpate–becomes qualified; brahma-bhūyāya–to know his internal divine identity (chit-svarūp-siddhi). [26]
26 A person who, without deviation, serves Me with devotion, transcends the three modes of material nature and becomes qualified to know his internal divine identity.
ब्रह्मणो हि प्रतिष्ठाहममृतस्याव्ययस्य च ।शाश्वतस्य च धर्म्मस्य सुखस्यैकान्तिकस्य च ॥२७॥
brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham amṛtasyāvyayasya chaśāśvatasya cha dharmasya sukhasyaikāntikasya cha [27]
hi–For; aham pratiṣṭhā–I am the basis; brahmaṇaḥ–of the Absolute Truth; avyayasya cha–and of the inexhaustible; amṛtasya–nectar; śāśvatasya cha–and of the eternal; dharmasya–divine Pastimes; aikāntikasya sukhasya cha–and of the ultimate ecstasy of divine love. [27]
27 I am the basis of the Absolute Truth, the inexhaustible nectar, the eternal Pastimes, and the ultimate ecstasy of divine love.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे गुणत्रयविभागयोगो नाम चतुर्द्दशोऽध्यायः ॥१४॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde guṇatrayavibhāga-yogo nāma chaturdaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [14]
End of Chapter FourteenThe Three Divisions of Material Naturefrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Fifteen Puruṣottama-yoga The Supreme Person
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
ऊर्ध्वमूलमधःशाखमश्वत्थं प्राहुरव्ययम् ।छन्दांसि यस्य पर्णानि यस्तं वेद स वेदवित् ॥१॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayamchhandāṁsi yasya parṇāni yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit [1]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: prāhuḥ–It is said in the scriptures (when describing this material world): ūrdhva-mūlam–“The roots are uppermost as it is rooted in aversion to the highest principle, the Supreme Lord; adhaḥ-śākham–the branches face downwards, representing all beings from Lord Brahmā down to the lowest species; avyayam–and it is endless (for those who desire the independence to enjoy the fruits of their actions); aśvattham–yet transient; (for a person with devotion to the Lord) it will be ‘gone tomorrow’. chhandāṁsi–The ritualistic verses of the Vedas; parṇāni–are represented by the protective leaves; yasya–of the Aśvattha or Peepul tree of this material world.” yaḥ–One who; veda–knows; tam–that tree; saḥ–he; veda-vit–is a knower of the Vedas. [1]
1 The Supreme Lord said: It is said in the scriptures that this material world is like a Peepul tree, roots up, branches down, endless, yet transient. Its leaves represent the nourishing verses of the Vedas. One who knows this tree is a knower of the Vedas.
Commentary
The roots of the tree of this world are said to face upwards—its root cause is the highest plane. It is manifest by the potency of the Supreme Lord. However, it is rooted in aversion to the Lord. Its branches are said to face downwards since according to the law of karma all species of life from the highest to the lowest branch out from it. It is known as an Aśvattha tree. The word aśvattha means ‘ephemeral,’ or ‘that which does not remain in the same state for even a day.’ Yet, it is endless* in the sense that it constantly appears in the natural flow of cause and effect. The leaves of the tree represent the fruitive verses of the Vedas (karma-kāṇḍa). As the leaves of a tree nourish and beautify it, these verses similarly encourage and illuminate the world.
The external potency of the Lord, māyā, is eternal, and it manifests this world. Yet the world itself is perishable inasmuch as it again becomes unmanifest. Although the fruitive verses of the Vedas provide its nourishment, their underlying purpose is rather to enlighten the conditioned souls to take shelter of the Supreme Lord who is transcendental to the mundane. Thus, one who knows these fundamental principles is a knower of the true essence of the Vedas.
*The Peepul tree is known for its longevity.
अधश्चोर्ध्वं प्रसृतास्तस्य शाखागुणप्रवृद्धा विषयप्रवालाः ।अधश्च मूलान्यनुसन्ततानिकर्म्मानुबन्धीनि मनुष्यलोके ॥२॥
adhaś chordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhāguṇa-pravṛddhā viṣaya-pravālāḥadhaś cha mūlāny anusantatānikarmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke [2]
tasya śākhāḥ–Its branches, representing the living beings; viṣaya-pravālāḥ–with shoots, representing the objects of the senses; guṇa-pravṛddhāḥ–nourished by the three modes of nature; adhaḥ prasṛtāḥ–extend downwards as the planes of human, animal, and lower species; ūrdhvam cha–and upwards, as the planes of higher celestial beings. karma-anubandhīni–According to religious and irreligious actions; mūlāni–some roots, as aerial roots; anusantatāni–as a secondary causal factor, as the search to enjoy the fruits of actions, have extended; adhaḥ cha–downwards also; manuṣya-loke–in the human plane. [2]
2 Some of its branches extend upwards (as the planes of the demigods and celestial beings), some of the branches extend downwards (as the planes of the humans, animals, and lower species), and nourished by three modes of nature, its shoots are the objects of the senses. Some aerial roots also extend downwards, to take root in the land of karma, within the human plane.
Commentary
Within the expansive manifestation of this ‘perishable yet endless’ world, some of the living beings are nourished by the mode of goodness, and they wander throughout the upper planes, in the ego of gods and celestial beings. Others, influenced by the modes of passion and ignorance, are wandering throughout the planes of the humans, animals, trees, and lower species, assuming the identities of those species. The shoots of the tree of this world represent the objects of the senses—sound, smell, touch, taste, and form, as transformations of the five primary subtle elements (pañcha-tanmātra) produced from the ego of the living beings.
The principal roots face upwards, inverted, indicating aversion to the Supreme Lord. Further, some aerial roots face downward, entering the land of karma in the human plane. These represent the humans’ attempt to enjoy the fruits of their actions, and these aerial roots nourish the tree as a separate, secondary cause.
न रूपमस्येह तथोपलभ्यतेनान्तो न चादिर्न च सम्प्रतिष्ठा ।अश्वत्थमेनं सुविरूढमूलम्असङ्गशस्त्रेण दृढेन छित्त्वा ॥३॥
ततः पदं तत्परिमार्गितव्यंयस्मिन्गता न निवर्त्तन्ति भूयः ।तमेव चाद्यं पुरुषं प्रपद्येयतः प्रवृत्तिः प्रसृता पुराणी ॥४॥
na rūpam asyeha tathopalabhyatenānto na chādir na cha sampratiṣṭhāaśvattham enaṁ suvirūḍha-mūlamasaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chhittvā [3]
tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁyasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥtam eva chādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadyeyataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī [4]
iha–Within this world; tathā rūpam–that inverted form; asya–of the Aśvattha tree representing this world; na upalabhyate–cannot be realised (through any method except Vedic knowledge); (asya) antaḥ na–nor its end; ādiḥ cha na–nor its origin; sampratiṣṭhā cha na–nor its continuance. chhittvā–Cutting down; enam suvirūḍha-mūlam–this stubbornly rooted (in aversion to the Supreme Lord); aśvattham–perishable tree of the material world; dṛḍhena–with the sharp; asaṅga-śastreṇa–axe of detachment acquired from sādhu-saṅga, association of saints; tataḥ–and thereafter; yasmin gatāḥ (santaḥ)–having reached that plane from which; (kechid api)–one; na nivartanti–does not return; bhūyaḥ–again; parimārgitavyam–one should approach for shelter; tat padam–the holy feet of Lord Viṣṇu; (ekānta bhaktyā)–with exclusive devotion; (iti evam)–in this way: prapadye–“I surrender unto; tam eva cha–Him alone; ādyam–the original; puruṣam–Supreme Person; yataḥ–from whose illusory energy; (eṣā)–this; purāṇī–perpetual; pravṛttiḥ–manifestation; prasṛtā–has appeared.” [3–4]
3–4 In the human plane, this inverted form of the Peepul tree of this material world is inconceivable (without Vedic knowledge)—neither its beginning, nor its middle, nor its end can be perceived. From the association of devotees, one acquires the sharp axe of detachment from the mundane. Using this weapon to cut down that illusory tree of one’s mundane existence which is stubbornly rooted in aversion to the Supreme Lord, one attains to the plane of no return, which is the lotus feet of the Lord. With pure devotion, one should approach the holy lotus feet of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu for shelter, and pray, “I surrender unto the Original Person, the Supreme Lord of all, by whose illusory potency (māyā) this perpetual tree of the material world has appeared.”
निर्म्मानमोहा जितसङ्गदोषाअध्यात्मनित्या विनिवृत्तकामाः ।द्वन्द्वैर्विमुक्ताः सुखदुःखसंज्ञैर्गच्छन्त्यमूढाः पदमव्ययं तत् ॥५॥
nirmāna-mohā jita-saṅga-doṣāadhyātma-nityā vinivṛtta-kāmāḥdvandvair vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñairgachchhanty amūḍhāḥ padam avyayaṁ tat [5]
nirmāna-mohāḥ (santaḥ)–Having become free from pride and delusion; jita-saṅga-doṣāḥ–free from the defect of unholy association; adhyātma-nityāḥ–dedicated to self-realisation; vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ–completely free from desire; vimuktāḥ–completely liberated; dvandvaiḥ–from the dualities; sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñaiḥ–known as joy and sorrow; amūḍhāḥ–thus undeluded; (te)–those surrendered souls; gachchhanti–reach; tat–that; avyayam–eternal; padam–goal. [5]
5 Free from vanity and delusion, aloof to unholy association, dedicated to self-realisation, desireless, liberated from the duality of joy and sorrow, undeluded, those surrendered souls reach the eternal goal.
न तद्भासयते सूर्य्यो न शशाङ्को न पावकः ।यद्गत्वा न निवर्त्तन्ते तद्धाम परमं मम ॥६॥
na tad bhāsayate sūryo na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥyad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [6]
tat mama–That is My; paramam–all-illuminating; dhāma–holy abode; gatvā–having reached; yat–which; (prapannāḥ)–the surrendered souls; na nivartante (tataḥ)–never return from there. sūryaḥ–The sun; na bhāsayate–cannot illuminate; tat–that; na śaśāṅkaḥ–nor the moon; na pāvakaḥ–nor fire. [6]
6 The surrendered souls reach My eternal abode, never to return to this world. Neither sun, nor moon, nor fire—nothing can illuminate that all-illuminating supreme abode.
ममैवांशो जीवलोके जीवभूतः सनातनः ।मनः षष्ठानीन्द्रियाणि प्रकृतिस्थानि कर्षति ॥७॥
mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥmanaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [7]
eva–Certainly; jīva-bhūtaḥ–the spirit soul living being is; mama–My; sanātanaḥ–eternal; aṁśaḥ–particle, potency. jīva-loke–In this world; karṣati–it attracts, adopts; prakṛti-sthāni–the mundane; manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi–six perceptual senses including the mind. [7]
7 The soul is a particle (potency) of Mine. Although it is eternal, for worldly existence it adopts the five mundane senses and the mind, which is the sixth.
शरीरं यदवाप्नोति यच्चाप्युत्क्रामतीश्वरः ।गृहीत्वैतानि संयाति वायुर्गन्धानिवाशयात् ॥८॥
śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti yach chāpy utkrāmatīśvaraḥgṛhītvaitāni saṁyāti vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt [8]
yat sarīram–Regarding any body which; īśvaraḥ–the soul, as master of the body; avāpnoti–obtains; yat cha api–and from which; utkrāmati–it departs; (tadā)–then; gṛhītvā–taking; etāni–these six senses; vāyuḥ iva–as the wind; gandhān–carries fragrance; āśayāt–from its source, such as a flower; (śarīrāntaram) saṁyāti–it goes to enter another body. [8]
8 The soul is the master of the body. When it departs the body, it goes to enter another, carrying these (subtle) senses, as the wind carries fragrance from its source.
श्रोत्रञ्चक्षुः स्पर्शनञ्च रसनं घ्राणमेव च ।अधिष्ठाय मनश्चायं विषयानुपसेवते ॥९॥
śrotrañ chakṣuḥ sparśanañ cha rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva chaadhiṣṭhāya manaś chāyaṁ viṣayān upasevate [9]
adhiṣṭhāya–Presiding over; śrotram–the ear; chakṣuḥ–eye; sparśanam–skin; rasanam cha–tongue; ghrāṇam eva cha–and nose; manaḥ cha–and also the mind; ayam–this soul; upasevate–enjoys; viṣayān–the objects of the senses—sound, etc. [9]
9 Presiding over the ear, eye, skin, tongue, and nose, and also the mind, the living entity enjoys the sense objects of sound, form, touch, taste, and smell.
उत्क्रामन्तं स्थितं वापि भुञ्जानं वा गुणान्वितम् ।विमूढा नानुपश्यन्ति पश्यन्ति ज्ञानचक्षुषः ॥१०॥
utkrāmantaṁ sthitaṁ vāpi bhuñjānaṁ vā guṇānvitamvimūḍhā nānupaśyanti paśyanti jñāna-chakṣuṣaḥ [10]
vimūḍhāḥ–Those thus deluded; na anupaśyanti–cannot see; (jīvam)–the soul; utkrāmantam–when departing the body; sthitam vā api–or residing in the body; bhuñjānam vā–or enjoying; guṇa-anvitam–in association with the senses and their objects. jñāna-chakṣuṣaḥ–Persons with the eyes of wisdom; paśyanti–see. [10]
10 Those who are thus deluded cannot see the soul when it is departing the body, residing in the body, or when enjoying through the senses in the body. Those with the eyes of wisdom can see.
यतन्तो योगिनश्चैनं पश्यन्त्यात्मन्यवस्थितम् ।यतन्तोऽप्यकृतात्मानो नैनं पश्यन्त्यचेतसः ॥११॥
yatanto yoginaś chainaṁ paśyanty ātmany avasthitamyatanto ’py akṛtātmāno nainaṁ paśyanty achetasaḥ [11]
cha–And; yatantaḥ–the perseverent, sincere; yoginaḥ–yogīs—seekers; paśyanti–see; enam–this soul; avasthitam–situated; ātmani–within. yatantaḥ api–But despite endeavouring; achetasaḥ–those of poor understanding; akṛta-ātmānaḥ–lacking self-control; na paśyanti–cannot see; enam–this soul. [11]
11 And the sincere seekers see the soul present within. But persons of poor understanding and lacking in self-control cannot see the soul, despite their endeavours.
यदादित्यगतं तेजो जगद्भासयतेऽखिलम् ।यच्चन्द्रमसि यच्चाग्नौ तत्तेजो विद्धि मामकम् ॥१२॥
yad āditya-gataṁ tejo jagad bhāsayate ’khilamyach chandramasi yach chāgnau tat tejo viddhi māmakam [12]
yat tejaḥ–That effulgence which; āditya-gatam–emanates from the sun; bhāsayate–and illuminates; akhilam jagat–the entire universe; yat chandramasi cha–and which is in the moon; yat agnau (cha)–and which is in fire; viddhi–know; tat tejaḥ–that effulgence; māmakam–as Mine. [12]
12 The light of the sun that illuminates the entire universe, the light of the moon, and the radiance of fire—know that to be Mine.
गामाविश्य च भूतानि धारयाम्यहमोजसा ।पुष्णामि चौषधीः सर्व्वाः सोमो भूत्वा रसात्मकः ॥१३॥
gām āviśya cha bhūtāni dhārayāmy aham ojasāpuṣṇāmi chauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ [13]
āviśya cha–Entering; gām–the earth; aham–I; dhārayāmi–maintain; bhūtāni–the living beings; ojasā–by My potency. bhūtvā cha–And becoming; rasa-ātmakaḥ–the essential; somaḥ–moon; (aham) puṣṇāmi–I nourish; sarvāḥ–all; auṣadhīḥ–crops. [13]
13 Entering the earth, I maintain all beings by My potency; and in the form of the life-giving moon, I nourish the crops.
अहं वैश्वानरो भूत्वा प्राणिनां देहमाश्रितः ।प्राणापानसमायुक्तःपचाम्यन्नं चतुर्विधम् ॥१४॥
ahaṁ vaiśvānaro bhūtvā prāṇināṁ deham āśritaḥprāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ pachāmy annaṁ chatur-vidham [14]
bhūtvā–Becoming; vaiśvānaraḥ–the power of digestion; aham–I; āśritaḥ–entering into; prāṇinām deham–the bodies of the living beings; pachāmi–digest; chatuḥ-vidham annam–the four types of foodstuffs; prāṇa-apāna-samāyuktaḥ–through the agency of the ascending and descending vital airs. [14]
14 Entering into the bodies of the living beings as the power of digestion, I digest the four types of eatables (chewed, sucked, licked, and drunk), through the agency of the ascending and descending vital airs.
सर्व्वस्य चाहं हृदि सन्निविष्ठोमत्तः स्मृतिर्ज्ञानमपोहनञ्च ।वेदैश्च सर्व्वैरहमेव वेद्योवेदान्तकृद्वेदविदेव चाहम् ॥१५॥
sarvasya chāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭhomattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanañ chavedaiś cha sarvair aham eva vedyovedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva chāham [15]
aham cha sanniviṣṭaḥ–I am situated as the indwelling monitor, the Supersoul; hṛdi–within the heart; sarvasya–of all beings. (jīvasya)–The living being’s; smṛtiḥ–remembrance; jñānam–knowledge; apohanam cha–and the disappearance of both; mattaḥ–arise from Me; aham eva cha vedyaḥ–and I alone am the object to be known; sarvaiḥ vedaiḥ–by means of all the Vedas. aham eva vedānta-kṛt–In the form of Vedavyās, I am the revealer of the Vedānta; veda-vit cha–and the knower of the meaning of the Vedas. [15]
15 I am situated (as the Supersoul) within the heart of all souls, and from Me arises the soul’s remembrance, knowledge, and forgetfulness (according to his actions). I alone am the Sweet Absolute to be known through all the Vedas. I am the revealer of the Vedānta—Vedavyās, and I am the knower of the Vedas.
द्वाविमौ पुरुषौ लोके क्षरश्चाक्षर एव च ।क्षरः सर्व्वाणि भूतानि कूटस्थोऽक्षर उच्यते ॥१६॥
dvāv imau puruṣau loke kṣaraś chākṣara eva chakṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni kūṭastho ’kṣara uchyate [16]
loke–In the fourteen worlds; imau dvau eva–only these two types of; puruṣau–conscious entities; (sthaḥ)–exist: kṣaraḥ cha–the perishable; akṣaraḥ cha–and the imperishable. (tayoḥ)–Of the two; sarvāṇi bhūtāni–all beings, from Lord Brahmā down to the lowest stationary beings; uchyate–are described; kṣaraḥ–as perishable, as they are fallen from their true nature; kūṭa-sthaḥ–and the associates of the Lord, situated in their eternally perfect nature; (uchyate)–are described; akṣaraḥ–as imperishable; (vidvadbhiḥ)–by the knowledgeable. [16]
16 In this world, there are two types of beings: the perishable and the imperishable. All beings from Lord Brahmā down to the lowest stationary life-forms are known as perishable (as they are fallen from their true nature). But those who are situated in their eternal, spiritual nature are known as imperishable (eternal associates of the Lord).
उत्तमः पुरुषस्त्वन्यः परमात्मेत्युदाहृतः ।यो लोकत्रयमाविश्य बिभर्त्त्यव्यय ईश्वरः ॥१७॥
uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ paramātmety udāhṛtaḥyo loka-trayam āviśya bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ [17]
anyaḥ tu–But otherwise; uttamaḥ–the Supreme; puruṣaḥ–Person; udāhṛtaḥ–is described; iti–as; paramātmā–the Supersoul, Akṣara-puruṣ, or the Supreme Imperishable Personality; īśvaraḥ–the Lord: yaḥ–who; āviśya–entering; loka-trayam–the three worlds; avyayaḥ–in His eternal form; bibharti–is maintaining all beings. [17]
17 But completely distinct from both these types of beings is the Supreme Person, who is known as Paramātmā, the Supersoul. He is the Supreme Lord. Entering the three worlds in His eternal form, He maintains all beings in the universe.
यस्मात्क्षरमतीतोऽहमक्षरादपि चोत्तमः ।अतोऽस्मि लोके वेदे च प्रथितः पुरुषोत्तमः ॥१८॥
yasmāt kṣaram atīto ’ham akṣarād api chottamaḥato ’smi loke vede cha prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ [18]
yasmāt–Because; aham atītaḥ–I am transcendental to; kṣaram–the perishable beings; cha–and; (aham) uttamaḥ–I am superior; akṣarāt api–to the liberated souls, too; ataḥ–therefore; prathitaḥ asmi–I am glorified; loke–in the world; vede cha–and in the Vedas; puruṣottamaḥ–as Puruṣottam, the Supreme Person. [18]
18 Because I am transcendental to the perishable beings and also superior to My imperishable eternal associates, My glories are sung in the world and in the scriptures as Puruṣottam, the Supreme Person.
यो मामेवमसम्मूढो जानाति पुरुषोत्तमम् ।स सर्व्वविद्भजति मां सर्व्वभावेन भारत ॥१९॥
yo mām evam asammūḍho jānāti puruṣottamamsa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ sarva-bhāvena bhārata [19]
(he) bhārata–O descendant of Bharat; yaḥ–one who; asammūdhaḥ (san)–being free from delusion; jānāti–knows; mām–Me; evam puruṣottamam–as the Supreme Person; saḥ sarva-vit–that knower of complete essential truth; bhajati–worships; mām–Me; sarva-bhāvena–in all ways (in all spiritual relationships). [19]
19 O Bhārat, one who is free from delusion and knows Me as the Supreme Person of eternal, all-conscious, ecstatic form, is the perfect knower of full-fledged theism, and he worships Me in all ways (in the spiritual relationships of tranquillity, servitorship, friendship, parenthood, and consorthood).
इति गुह्यतमं शास्त्रमिदमुक्तं मयानघ ।एतद्बुद्ध्वा बुद्धिमान्स्यात्कृतकृत्यश्च भारत ॥२०॥
iti guhyatamaṁ śāstram idam uktaṁ mayānaghaetad buddhvā buddhimān syāt kṛta-kṛtyaś cha bhārata [20]
(he) anagha–O sinless one; iti–in this way; idam–this; guhyatamam–most hidden; śāstram–purport of all the scriptures; uktam–has been described; mayā–by Me. (he) bhārata–O Bharat; etat buddhvā–taking this to heart; buddhimān–the intelligent persons of fine theistic temperament; kṛta-kṛtyaḥ cha syāt–attain their goal. [20]
20 O pure hearted Arjuna, I have thus explained to you this most hidden treasure of all the scriptures. O Bhārat, embracing this in their hearts, the persons of fine theistic intelligence attain the perfection of their endeavours.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे पुरुषोत्तमयोगो नाम पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः ॥१५॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde puruṣottama-yogo nāma pañchadaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [15]
End of Chapter FifteenThe Supreme Personfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
षोडशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Sixteen Daivāsura-sampad-vibhāga-yoga The Godly and Ungodly Natures
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
अभयं सत्त्वसंशुद्धिर्ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थितिः ।दानं दमश्च यज्ञश्च स्वाध्यायस्तप आर्ज्जवम् ॥१॥
अहिंसा सत्यमक्रोधस्त्यागः शान्तिरपैशुनम् ।दया भूतेष्वलोलुप्त्वं मार्द्दवं ह्रीरचापलम् ॥२॥
तेजः क्षमा धृतिः शौचमद्रोहो नातिमानिता ।भवन्ति सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातस्य भारत ॥३॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥdānaṁ damaś cha yajñaś cha svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam [1]
ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas tyāgaḥ śāntir apaiśunamdayā bhūteṣv aloluptvaṁ mārdavaṁ hrīr achāpalam [2]
tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucham adroho nātimānitābhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm abhijātasya bhārata [3]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: (he) bhārata–O Arjuna; (ete guṇāḥ) bhavanti–these are the qualities; abhijātasya–of a person born to a destiny; daivīm sampadam–blessed with godliness: abhayam–fearlessness; sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ–gracious-heartedness; jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ–absorption in the yoga of knowledge (13.8–12); dānam–generosity; damaḥ cha–sense-control; yajñaḥ cha–sacrifice; svādhyāyaḥ–study of the Vedas; tapaḥ–austerity; ārjavam–straightforwardness; ahiṁsā–nonviolence; satyam–truthfulness; akrodhaḥ–freedom from anger; tyāgaḥ–worldly detachment; śantiḥ–mental control, tranquillity; apaiśunam–freedom from finding fault in others; dayā–compassion; bhūteṣu–for all beings; aloluptvam–absence of greed; mārdavam–gentleness; hrīḥ–modesty; achāpalam–steadfastness; tejaḥ–vigour; kṣamā–forgiveness; dhṛtiḥ–patience; śaucham–external and internal purity; adrohaḥ–freedom from malice; na ati-mānitā–and freedom from conceit. [1–3]
1–3 The Supreme Lord said: O Bhārat, these are the qualities of a person born of a godly nature: fearlessness, gracious-heartedness, absorption in self-knowledge, generosity, sense-control, sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity, sincerity, nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger, worldly detachment, tranquillity, disinclination to see the faults of others, compassion, freedom from greed, gentleness, modesty, steadfastness, vigour, forgiveness, patience, purity, and freedom from malice and egoism.
दम्भो दर्पोऽभिमानश्च क्रोधः पारुष्यमेव च ।अज्ञानं चाभिजातस्य पार्थ सम्पदमासुरीम् ॥४॥
dambho darpo ’bhimānaś cha krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva chaajñānaṁ chābhijātasya pārtha sampadam āsurīm [4]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; (ete guṇāḥ bhavanti)–these are the (impure) characteristics; abhijātasya–of a person born to a destiny; āsurīm sampadam–of the ungodly nature: dambhaḥ–pride (of religiosity, etc); darpaḥ–conceit (on account of one’s knowledge, wealth, or high birth); abhimānaḥ cha–considering oneself worshippable; krodhaḥ–anger; pāruṣyam eva cha–mercilessness; ajñānam cha–and ignorance. [4]
4 O Pārtha, these are the qualities of a person born of an ungodly nature: pride, conceit, egoism, anger, cruelty, and ignorance.
दैवी सम्पद्विमोक्षाय निबन्धायासुरी मता ।मा शुचः सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातोऽसि पाण्डव ॥५॥
daivī sampad vimokṣāya nibandhāyāsurī matāmā śuchaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm abhijāto ’si pāṇḍava [5]
daivī sampat–The godly qualities; matā–are described; vimokṣāya–as the cause of liberation; āsurī (cha)–and the demoniac qualities; nibandhāya–as the cause of bondage. (he) pāṇḍava–O son of Pāṇḍu; (tvam)–you; abhijātaḥ asi–are born to a destiny; daivīm sampadam–of the godly and virtuous qualities; mā śuchaḥ–so do not fear. [5]
5 The godly qualities have been described as the cause of liberation, and the ungodly qualities have been described as the cause of bondage. O Pāṇḍava, do not fear, for you are born of a godly nature.
द्वौ भूतसर्गौ लोकेऽस्मिन्दैव आसुर एव च ।दैवो विस्तरशः प्रोक्त आसुरं पार्थ मे शृणु ॥६॥
dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin daiva āsura eva chadaivo vistaraśaḥ prokta āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu [6]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; dvau eva bhūta-sargau–these two natures of beings; (dṛśyate)–are seen; asmin loke–in this material world: daivaḥ–the godly nature; āsuraḥ cha—and the ungodly. daivaḥ–The godly nature; proktaḥ–has been described; vistaraśaḥ–elaborately. śṛṇu–Now hear; me–from Me; āsuram–of the ungodly nature. [6]
6 O Pārtha, in this world the living beings are of two natures—the godly and the ungodly. I have elaborately described the godly nature to you, so now hear from Me about the ungodly:
प्रवृत्तिञ्च निवृत्तिञ्च जना न विदुरासुराः ।न शौचं नापि चाचारो न सत्यं तेषु विद्यते ॥७॥
pravṛttiñ cha nivṛttiñ cha janā na vidur āsurāḥna śauchaṁ nāpi chāchāro na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate [7]
āsurāḥ janāḥ–Persons of demoniac nature; na viduḥ–do not know; pravṛttim cha–right action; nivṛttim cha–and wrong action. na vidyate–There is neither; śaucham–purity; na–nor; āchāraḥ api–good practices; na satyam cha–nor truthfulness; teṣu–in them. [7]
7 The ungodly cannot distinguish between right and wrong action. No purity, good practices, or truthfulness can be found in them.
असत्यमप्रतिष्ठं ते जगदाहुरनीश्वरम् ।अपरस्परसम्भूतं किमन्यत्कामहेतुकम् ॥८॥
asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te jagad āhur anīśvaramaparaspara-sambhūtaṁ kim anyat kāma-hetukam [8]
te–They, the persons of demoniac nature; āhuḥ–say: jagat asatyam–“The world is without truth; apratiṣṭham–baseless; anīśvaram–godless; aparaspara-sambhūtam–and everything is born of male and female union. kāma-hetukam–The reason for existence is lust alone. kim anyat–What is there beyond this?” [8]
8 The persons of ungodly nature say the world is without truth, baseless, godless, and that everything is born of male and female union. They say that life has no purpose beyond lust.
एतां दृष्टिमवष्टभ्य नष्टात्मानोऽल्पबुद्धयः ।प्रभवन्त्युग्रकर्म्माणः क्षयाय जगतोऽहिताः ॥९॥
etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥprabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ [9]
avaṣṭabhya–Holding; etām–such; dṛṣṭim–a view; (asurāḥ)–the demons; naṣṭa-ātmānaḥ–depraved; alpa-buddhayaḥ–of low intelligence; ugra-karmāṇaḥ–of cruel acts; ahitāḥ–of inauspicious nature; prabhavanti–become powerful; kṣayāya–for the destruction; jagataḥ–of the world. [9]
9 Holding such a view, the demons, depraved and of low intelligence, become powerful and engage in cruel, inauspicious acts for the destruction of the world.
काममाश्रित्य दुष्पूरं दम्भमानमदान्विताः ।मोहाद्गृहीत्वासद्ग्राहान्प्रवर्त्तन्तेऽशुचिव्रताः ॥१०॥
kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ dambha-māna-madānvitāḥmohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān pravartante ’śuchi-vratāḥ [10]
āśritya–Giving themselves up to; duṣpūram–insatiable; kāmam–desire; (te)–such demons; dambha-māna-mada-anvitāḥ–full of vanity, pride, and arrogance; mohāt–deluded; asat-grāhān gṛhītvā–by eagerness for mundane enjoyment; pravartante–engage; aśuchi-vratāḥ–in grave malpractices. [10]
10 Giving themselves up to the delusion of insatiable desires for mundane enjoyment, such demons, full of vanity, pride, and arrogance, engage in grave malpractices.
चिन्तामपरिमेयाञ्च प्रलयान्तामुपाश्रिताः ।कामोपभोगपरमा एतावदिति निश्चिताः ॥११॥
आशापाशशतैर्बद्धाः कामक्रोधपरायणाः ।ईहन्ते कामभोगार्थमन्यायेनार्थसञ्चयान् ॥१२॥
chintām aparimeyāñ cha pralayāntām upāśritāḥkāmopabhoga-paramā etāvad iti niśchitāḥ [11]
āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥīhante kāma-bhogārtham anyāyenārtha-sañchayān [12]
pralaya-antām–Until death; upāśritāḥ–overwhelmed with; aparimeyām cha–unlimited; chintām–cares; (te)–they; niśchitāḥ iti–consider that; etāvat–only; kāma-upabhoga-paramāḥ–enjoyment of desires is the ultimate. baddhāḥ–Bound; āśā-pāśa-śataiḥ–by the snares of hundreds of wishes; kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ–overcome with desire and anger; (te) īhante–they try; artha-sañchayān–to amass wealth; anyāyena–unlawfully; kāma-bhoga-artham–for the fulfillment of their desires. [11–12]
11–12 Until death they remain burdened with endless cares. They think that mundane enjoyment is the goal of life. Bound by hundreds of wishes and overcome with desire and anger, they endeavour to amass wealth unlawfully to fulfill their desires.
इदमद्य मया लब्धमिदं प्राप्स्ये मनोरथम्  ।इदमस्तीदमपि मे भविष्यति पुनर्धनम् ॥१३॥
idam adya mayā labdham idaṁ prāpsye manorathamidam astīdam api me bhaviṣyati punar dhanam [13]
adya–“Today; idam–this; labdham–was gained; mayā–by me; (punaḥ)–and again; prāpsye–I will get; idam manoratham–this other desirable object. idam–This wealth; asti me–is mine; punaḥ–and again; idam api dhanam–more wealth; bhaviṣyati–will be; (me)–mine.” [13]
13 The ungodly persons say, “Today I got what I wanted, and tomorrow I will also get what I want. All this is my wealth, and I will have even more in the future.”
असौ मया हतः शत्रुर्हनिष्ये चापरानपि ।ईश्वरोऽहमहं भोगी सिद्धोऽहं बलवान्सुखी ॥१४॥
asau mayā hataḥ śatrur haniṣye chāparān apiīśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī siddho ’haṁ balavān sukhī [14]
asau–“This; śatruḥ–enemy; hataḥ–has been destoyed; mayā–by me; api cha–and again; haniṣye–I will destroy; aparān–others. aham īśvaraḥ–I am the lord; aham bhogī–I am the enjoyer; aham siddhaḥ–I am successful; balavān–powerful; sukhī–and happy.” [14]
14 “I have destroyed one enemy, and I will destroy others. I am successful, powerful, and happy.”
आढ्योऽभिजनवानस्मि कोऽन्योऽस्ति सदृशो मया ।यक्ष्ये दास्यामि मोदिष्य इत्यज्ञानविमोहिताः ॥१५॥
āḍhyo ’bhijanavān asmi ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayāyakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya ity ajñāna-vimohitāḥ [15]
(aham) asmi–“I am; āḍhyaḥ–rich; abhijanavān–and high-born. kaḥ asti–Who is; anyaḥ–another; mayā sadṛśaḥ–like me? (aham)–I; yakṣye–will perform sacrifice; dāsyāmi–give charity; modiṣye–and enjoy.” iti–Thus; ajñāna-vimohitāḥ–they are deluded by ignorant notions. [15]
15 “I am wealthy and aristocratic. Who can compare with me? I shall perform sacrifice, give charity, and enjoy myself.” Thus they are deluded by ignorance.
अनेकचित्तविभ्रान्ता मोहजालसमावृताः ।प्रसक्ताः कामभोगेषु पतन्ति नरकेऽशुचौ ॥१६॥
aneka-chitta-vibhrāntā moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥprasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu patanti narake ’śuchau [16]
aneka-chitta-vibhrāntāḥ–Their minds full of many vain thoughts; moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ–caught in the net of illusion; prasaktāḥ–engrossed; kāma-bhogeṣu–in mundane enjoyment; patanti–they fall; aśuchau–to a foul; narake–hell, like Vaitaraṇī. [16]
16 Their minds full of vain thoughts, caught in the net of illusion and engrossed in mundane enjoyment, such ungodly persons fall to a foul hell.
आत्मसम्भाविताः स्तब्धा धनमानमदान्विताः ।यजन्ते नामयज्ञैस्ते दम्भेनाविधिपूर्व्वकम् ॥१७॥
ātma-sambhāvitāḥ stabdhā dhana-māna-madānvitāḥyajante nāma-yajñais te dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam [17]
ātma-sambhāvitāḥ–Conceited; stabdhāḥ–obstinate; dhana-māna-mada-anvitāḥ–intoxicated by wealth and pride; te–those demons; avidhi-pūrvakam–ignoring the scriptural injunctions; dambhena–hypocritically; yajante–perform sacrifices; nama-yajñaiḥ–in name only (pseudo-sacrifices). [17]
17 Conceited, obstinate, and intoxicated by wealth and grandeur, ignoring the scriptural injunctions, these demons make a hypocritical show of sacrifices.
अहङ्कारं बलं दर्पं कामं क्रोधञ्च संश्रिताः ।मामात्मपरदेहेषु प्रद्विषन्तोऽभ्यसूयकाः ॥१८॥
ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ kāmaṁ krodhañ cha saṁśritāḥmām ātma-para-deheṣu pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ [18]
saṁśritāḥ–Given to; ahaṅkāram–egoism; balam–power; darpam–pride; kāmam–lust; krodham cha–and anger; (te bhavanti)–they are; pradviṣantaḥ–resentful; mām–of Me; (sthitam)–who am situated; ātma-para-deheṣu–within their own and others’ bodies; abhyasūyakāḥ–and they ascribe faults to the good qualities of the saintly persons. [18]
18 Given to egoism, pomp and power, lust and anger, they are resentful of Me, who am situated in their own and others’ bodies as the Supersoul, and they ascribe faults to the good qualities of the saintly persons.
तानहं द्विषतः क्रूरान्संसारेषु नराधमान् ।क्षिपाम्यजस्रमशुभानासुरीष्वेव योनिषु ॥१९॥
tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān saṁsāreṣu narādhamānkṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu [19]
aham–I; ajasram–continually; kṣipāmi–cast; tān–these; dviṣataḥ–resentful; krūrān–cruel; aśubhān–inauspicious; narādhamān–decadent persons; saṁsāreṣu–into the cycle of birth and death; āsurīṣu yoniṣu eva–in the wombs of the demoniac. [19]
19 I continually cast these resentful, cruel, inauspicious, and decadent persons into the demoniac species, in the cycle of birth and death.
आसुरीं योनिमापन्ना मूढा जन्मनि जन्मनि ।मामाप्राप्यैव कौन्तेय ततो यान्त्यधमां गतिम् ॥२०॥
āsurīṁ yonim āpannā mūḍhā janmani janmanimām aprāpyaiva kaunteya tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim [20]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; āpannāḥ–taking; janmani janmani–birth after birth; āsurīm–in demoniac; yonim–species; mūḍhāḥ–these deluded persons; aprāpya eva–not reaching; mām–Me; yānti gatim–suffer a fate; tataḥ adhamām–worse than that. [20]
20 O Kaunteya, repeatedly taking birth in the demoniac species, these deluded persons cannot come to Me, and they descend to lower and lower planes.
त्रिविधं नरकस्येदं द्वारं नाशनमात्मनः ।कामः क्रोधस्तथा लोभस्तस्मादेतत्त्रयं त्यजेत् ॥२१॥
tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥkāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet [21]
idam tri-vidham–These three kinds of; dvāram–doors; narakasya–of hell; ātmanaḥ nāśanam–lead to self-destruction: kāmaḥ–lust; krodhaḥ–anger; tathā lobhaḥ–and greed; tasmāt–so; etat trayam–these three; tyajet–must be abandoned. [21]
21 Lust, anger, and greed are the three doors of hell leading to self-destruction, so they must be abandoned.
एतैर्विमुक्तः कौन्तेय तमोद्वारैस्त्रिभिर्नरः ।आचरत्यात्मनः श्रेयस्ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥२२॥
etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥācharaty ātmanaḥ śreyas tato yāti parāṁ gatim [22]
(he) kaunteya–O Kaunteya; naraḥ–a person; vimuktaḥ–liberated; etaiḥ–from these; tribhiḥ tamaḥ-dvāraiḥ–three doors of darkness; ācharati–acts; śreyaḥ–for the benefit; ātmanaḥ–of the soul. tataḥ–By that; yāti–he reaches; parām–the supreme; gatim–goal. [22]
22 O Kaunteya, one who is liberated from these three doors of darkness strives for the benefit of the soul, by which he attains the supreme destination.
यः शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य वर्त्तते कामचारतः ।न स सिद्धिमवाप्नोति न सुखं न परां गतिम् ॥२३॥
yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-chārataḥna sa siddhim avāpnoti na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim [23]
saḥ yaḥ–He who; utsṛjya–disregarding; śāstra-vidhim–the injunctions of the scriptures; vartate kāma-chārataḥ–acts according to his own desires; avāpnoti–attains; na siddhim–neither perfection, purification; na sukham–nor happiness; na parām gatim–nor the supreme destination. [23]
23 One who acts according to his own desires, disregarding the scriptural injunctions, cannot attain perfection, happiness, or the supreme destination.
तस्माच्छास्त्रं प्रमाणं ते कार्य्याकार्य्यव्यवस्थितौ ।ज्ञात्वा शास्त्रविधानोक्तं कर्म्म कर्त्तुमिहार्हसि ॥२४॥
tasmāch chhāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te kāryākārya-vyavasthitaujñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ karma kartum ihārhasi [24]
tasmāt–Therefore; śāstram–the scriptural injunctions; kāryākārya-vyavasthitau–concerning duty and non-duty; te pramāṇam–are your authority. jñātvā–Knowing; śāstra-vidhāna-uktam–scripturally enjoined; karma–duty; iha–in this world of action; (tvam) arhasi–you ought; (tat) kartum–to act accordingly. [24]
24 Therefore, the scriptural injunctions for duty and non-duty are your authority. Knowing your duty in this world according to the scriptures (to act only for the Lord’s pleasure), you should act accordingly.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे दैवासुरसम्पद्विभागयोगो नाम षोडशोऽध्यायः ॥१६॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde daivāsura-sampad-vibhāga-yogo nāma ṣoḍaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [16]
End of Chapter SixteenThe Godly and Ungodly Naturesfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
सप्तदशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Seventeen Śraddhātraya-vibhāga-yoga The Three Types of Faith
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
ये शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य यजन्ते श्रद्धयान्विताः ।तेषां निष्ठा तु का कृष्ण सत्त्वमाहो रजस्तमः ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya yajante śraddhayānvitāḥteṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu kā kṛṣṇa sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) kṛṣṇa–O Kṛṣṇa; kā–what; niṣṭhā–is the position; teṣām–of those; ye–who; utsṛjya–ignore; śāstra-vidhim–the scriptural injunctions; tu–yet; sraddhayā-anvitāḥ (santaḥ)–faithfully; yajante–worship? (sa kim)–Is that; sattvam–in goodness; āho rajaḥ–or passion; (uta) tamaḥ–or ignorance? [1]
1 Arjuna inquired: O Kṛṣṇa, what is the position of those who worship with faith, but ignore the injunctions of the scriptures? Is their faith in the mode of goodness, passion, or ignorance?
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
त्रिविधा भवति श्रद्धा देहिनां सा स्वभावजा ।सात्त्विकी राजसी चैव तामसी चेति तां शृणु ॥२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
tri-vidhā bhavati śraddhā dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jāsāttvikī rājasī chaiva tāmasī cheti tāṁ śṛṇu [2]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: śraddhā eva–Faith; dehinām–of the living beings; bhavati–is; tri-vidhā iti–of these three types: sattvikī–good; rājasī cha–passionate; tāmasī cha–and ignorant. sā–That faith; svabhāva-jā–is born of their own nature acquired from impressions of previous lives. tām śṛṇu–Now hear of that. [2]
2 The Supreme Lord said: Faith is of three types, born of the embodied soul’s acquired nature, whether good, passionate, or ignorant. Now hear of this:
सत्त्वानुरूपा सर्व्वस्य श्रद्धा भवति भारत ।श्रद्धामयोऽयं पुरुषो यो यच्छ्रद्धः स एव सः ॥३॥
sattvānurūpā sarvasya śraddhā bhavati bhārataśraddhāmayo ’yaṁ puruṣo yo yach chhraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ [3]
(he) bhārata–O descendant of Bharata; śraddhā–the faith; sarvasya–of all living beings; bhavati–is; sattva-anurūpā–according to their consciousness. ayam puruṣaḥ–The living being; śraddhā-mayaḥ–possesses faith by constitution. saḥ–He; saḥ eva–is that; yaḥ yat śraddhaḥ–which his faith is. [3]
3 O Bhārata, the faith of all living beings is governed by their consciousness. The living being possesses faith by constitution. He is that which his faith is.
यजन्ते सात्त्विका देवान्यक्षरक्षांसि राजसाः ।प्रेतान्भूतगणांश्चान्ये यजन्ते तामसा जनाः ॥४॥
yajante sāttvikā devān yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥpretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś chānye yajante tāmasā janāḥ [4]
sāttvikāḥ–Those with faith of the nature of goodness; yajante–worship; devān–demigods of the nature of goodness. rājasāḥ–Those of passionate faith; yajante–worship; yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi–the Yakṣa demigods and Rākṣasa demons of passionate nature. anye–Others; tāmasāḥ janāḥ–who possess ignorant faith; (yajante)–worship; pretān bhūta-gaṇān cha–the ghosts and spirits of the nature of ignorance. [4]
4 Persons with faith of the nature of goodness worship the demigods, persons with faith of a passionate nature worship the Yakṣa demigods and Rākṣasa demons, while those with faith of the nature of ignorance worship the ghosts and spirits.
अशास्त्रविहितं घोरं तप्यन्ते ये तपो जनाः ।दम्भाहङ्कारसंयुक्ताः कामरागबलान्विताः ॥५॥
कर्शयन्तः शरीरस्थं भूतग्राममचेतसः ।मां चैवान्तः शरीरस्थं तान्विद्ध्यासुरनिश्चयान् ॥६॥
aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ tapyante ye tapo janāḥdambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ [5]
karśayantaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ bhūta-grāmam achetasaḥmāñ chaivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ tān viddhy āsura-niśchayān [6]
achetasaḥ–Ignorant; janāḥ–persons; ye–who; tapyante–perform; ghoram–severe; tapaḥ–austerities; aśāstra-vihitam–unsanctioned by the scriptures; dambha-ahaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ–full of pride and egoism; kāma-rāga-bala-anvitāḥ–and impelled by desire, attachment, and power; karśayantaḥ–torture; bhūta-grāmam–the five basic material elements; śarīra-stham–in the body; (karśayantaḥ) mām cha eva–and also torment Me, in the form of My particle, the spirit soul, the jīvātman; antaḥ śarīra-stham–in the body. viddhi–Know; tān–them; āsura-niśchayān–to be of demoniacal conviction. [5–6]
5–6 Full of pride and egoism, motivated by ambition, attachment, and power, ignorant persons perform severe austerities unsanctioned by the scriptures and torture the body’s natural elements and the soul within. Know them to be of demoniacal faith.
आहारस्त्वपि सर्व्वस्य त्रिविधो भवति प्रियः ।यज्ञस्तपस्तथा दानं तेषां भेदमिमं शृणु ॥७॥
āhāras tv api sarvasya tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥyajñas tapas tathā dānaṁ teṣāṁ bhedam imaṁ śṛṇu [7]
(guṇa bhedāt)–According to the three modes of material nature; bhavati tu api–there are also; tri-vidhaḥ āhāraḥ–three kinds of food; priyaḥ–pleasing; sarvasya–to everyone. tathā–There are similarly; (tri vidham)–three kinds; yajñaḥ–of sacrifice; tapaḥ–austerity; dānam–and charity. śṛṇu–Now hear of; imam–this; bhedam–classification; teṣām–of them. [7]
7 According to the three modes of material nature, there are also three kinds of food preference. In the same way, there are three kinds of sacrifice, three kinds of austerity, and three kinds of charity. Now hear of these:
आयुःसत्त्वबलारोग्यसुखप्रीतिविवर्धनाः ।रस्याः स्निग्धाः स्थिरा हृद्या आहाराः सात्त्विकप्रियाः ॥८॥
āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥrasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ [8]
āhārāḥ–Foods; āyuḥ-sattva-bala-ārogya-sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ–that increase longevity, vitality, strength, health, happiness, and loving kindness; rasyāḥ–tasty; snigdhāḥ–succulent; sthirāḥ–wholesome; hṛdyāḥ–and pleasant; (bhavati)–are; sāttvika-priyāḥ– dear to persons of the nature of goodness. [8]
8 Foods that increase longevity, vitality, strength, health, happiness, and loving kindness, and which are tasty, succulent, wholesome, and pleasant, are dear to persons of the nature of goodness.
कट्वम्ललवणात्युष्णतीक्ष्णरुक्षविदाहिनः ।आहारा राजसस्येष्टा दुःखशोकामयप्रदाः ॥९॥
kaṭv-amla-lavaṇāty-uṣṇa-tīkṣṇa-rukṣa-vidāhinaḥāhārā rājasasyeṣṭā duḥkha-śokāmaya-pradāḥ [9]
āhārāḥ–Food; kaṭu-amla-lavaṇa-ati-uṣṇa-tīkṣṇa-rukṣa-vidāhinaḥ–that is too bitter, too sour, too salty, too hot, too pungent, too dry, and overheating; duḥkha-śoka-āmaya-pradāḥ–and which cause pain, sorrow, and illness (bhavati)–are; iṣṭāḥ–dear; rājasasya–to the passionate. [9]
9 Foods dear to persons of passionate nature are too bitter (nimba, etc.), too sour, too salty, too hot, too pungent (chilli pepper, etc.), too dry (dry-roasted chickpeas, etc.), and too heating (mustard seed, etc.). Such foods cause pain, sorrow, and illness.
यातयामं गतरसं पूति पर्य्युषितञ्च यत् ।उच्छिष्टमपि चामेध्यं भोजनं तामसप्रियम् ॥१०॥
yāta-yāmaṁ gata-rasaṁ pūti paryuṣitañ cha yatuchchhiṣṭam api chāmedhyaṁ bhojanaṁ tāmasa-priyam [10]
yat bhojanam–That food which is; yāta-yāmam–cooked, but left to become cold; gata-rasam–tasteless; pūti–odoriferous; paryuṣitam cha–putrid; uchchhiṣṭam api–remnants (other than that of worshippable persons); amedhyam cha–and impure foods unofferable in sacrifice (meat, wine, and onions, etc.); (tat bhavati)–such food is; tāmasa-priyam–dear to the ignorant. [10]
10 Dear to the ignorant are foods that are stale, tasteless, foul-smelling or were cooked the day before, remnants (other than that of worshippable persons), and impure foods (such as meat, wine, and onions).
अफलाकाङ्क्षिभिर्यज्ञो विधिदिष्टो य इज्यते ।यष्टव्यमेवेति मनः समाधाय स सात्त्विकः ॥११॥
aphalākāṅkṣibhir yajño vidhi-diṣṭo ya ijyateyaṣṭavyam eveti manaḥ samādhāya sa sāttvikaḥ [11]
saḥ yajñaḥ–That sacrifice; yaḥ ijyate–which is performed; vidhi-diṣṭaḥ–according to scriptural injunctions; aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ–by one who does not hanker for its fruit; manaḥ samādhāya–with the firm conviction; yaṣṭavyam eva iti–and dutifully; sāttvikaḥ–is sacrifice of the nature of goodness. [11]
11 That sacrifice which is in accordance with scriptural injunctions and faithfully performed by a person free from fruitive desire, is sacrifice of the nature of goodness.
अभिसन्धाय तु फलं दम्भार्थमपि चैव यत् ।इज्यते भरतश्रेष्ठ तं यज्ञं विद्धि राजसम् ॥१२॥
abhisandhāya tu phalaṁ dambhārtham api chaiva yatijyate bharata-śreṣṭha taṁ yajñaṁ viddhi rājasam [12]
tu–But; (he) bharata-śreṣṭha–O Bharat; yat–that which; ijyate–is performed; abhisandhāya–motivated by; phalam–remuneration; dambha-artham api cha eva–and which is a show of pomp and grandeur; viddhi–know; tam yajñam–that sacrifice; rājasam–to be of a passionate nature. [12]
12 But, O Bhārat, know that sacrifice which is performed in fruitive expectation and as a display of pomp and grandeur, is sacrifice of the nature of passion.
विधिहीनमसृष्टान्नं मन्त्रहीनमदक्षिणम् ।श्रद्धाविरहितं यज्ञं तामसं परिचक्षते ॥१३॥
vidhi-hīnam asṛṣṭānnaṁ mantra-hīnam adakṣiṇamśraddhā-virahitaṁ yajñaṁ tāmasaṁ parichakṣate [13]
vidhi-hīnam–Non-scriptural; yajñam–sacrifice; asṛṣṭa-annam–without the distribution of food, etc.; mantra-hīnam–without mantra; adakṣiṇam–without appropriate offerings to the priests; śraddhā-virahitam–and without faith; parichakṣate–is called; tāmasam–ignorant. [13]
13 And that sacrifice which ignores the injunctions of the scriptures, which is performed without the distribution of foodstuffs, without uttering the appropriate mantras, without offerings to the priests, and without faith, is known as sacrifice in ignorance.
देवद्विजगुरुप्राज्ञपूजनं शौचमार्ज्जवम् ।ब्रह्मचर्य्यमहिंसा च शारीरं तप उच्यते ॥१४॥
deva-dvija-guru-prājña-pūjanaṁ śaucham ārjavambrahmacharyam ahiṁsā cha śārīraṁ tapa uchyate [14]
deva-dvija-guru-prājña-pūjanam–Worship of the deity, the brāhmaṇ, the guru, and the enlightened soul; śaucham–internal and external purity; ārjavam–simplicity; brahmacharyam–celibacy; ahiṁsā cha–and nonviolence; uchyate–are called; śārīram–bodily; tapaḥ–austerity. [14]
14 Worship of the deity, the brāhmaṇ, the spiritual master, and the enlightened soul, purity, simplicity, celibacy, and nonviolence—these all constitute austerity of the body.
अनुद्वेगकरं वाक्यं सत्यं प्रियहितञ्च यत् ।स्वाध्यायाभ्यसनं चैव वाङ्मयं तप उच्यते ॥१५॥
anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ satyaṁ priya-hitañ cha yatsvādhyāyābhyasanaṁ chaiva vāṅmayaṁ tapa uchyate [15]
satyam–Truthful; vākyam–speech; yat–which; anudvega-karam–does not disturb; priya-hitam cha–and is pleasing yet beneficial; svādhyāya-abhyasanam cha eva–and regular recitation of the Vedas; uchyate–is called; vāk-mayam–verbal; tapaḥ–austerity. [15]
15 Speech which does not disturb others, which is truthful, pleasing yet beneficial, as well as regular recitation of the Vedas—all these are known as verbal austerity.
मनः प्रसादः सौम्यत्वं मौनमात्मविनिग्रहः ।भावसंशुद्धिरित्येतत्तपो मानसमुच्यते ॥१६॥
manaḥ prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥbhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat tapo mānasam uchyate [16]
iti etat–All these; uchyate–are called; mānasam–mental; tapaḥ–austerity: manaḥ prasādaḥ–self-satisfaction; saumyatvam–benevolence; maunam–stability; ātma-vinigrahaḥ–mental control; bhāva-saṁśuddhiḥ–and pure-heartedness.[16]
16 Self-satisfaction, benevolence, stability, mental control, and pure-heartedness are all known as mental austerity.
श्रद्धया परया तप्तं तपस्तत्त्रिविधं नरैः ।अफलाकाङ्क्षिभिर्युक्तैः सात्त्विकं परिचक्षते ॥१७॥
śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥaphalākāṅkṣibhir yuktaiḥ sāttvikaṁ parichakṣate [17]
taptam–When practised; yuktaiḥ–by the devout; aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ–desireless; naraiḥ–person; parayā–with deep; śraddhayā–faith; tat–that; tri-vidham tapaḥ–threefold austerity (bodily, verbal, and mental); parichakṣate–are designated as; sāttvikam–being of the nature of goodness. [17]
17 When performed by a desireless, devout soul with deep faith in the Supreme Lord, this threefold austerity of thought, word, and deed is of the nature of goodness.
सत्कारमानपूजार्थं तपो दम्भेन चैव यत् ।क्रियते तदिह प्रोक्तं राजसं चलमध्रुवम् ॥१८॥
satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ tapo dambhena chaiva yatkriyate tad iha proktaṁ rājasaṁ chalam adhruvam [18]
tat–That; chalam–unenduring; adhruvam–transitory; tapaḥ–austerity; yat–which; kriyate–is performed; satkāra-māna-pūja-artham–for the sake of gain, worship, and fame; dambhena cha eva–and performed with great pride; iha proktam–is designated in this world as; rājasam–passionate austerity. [18]
18 That unenduring, transitory austerity which is proudly performed for the sake of gain, worship, name, and fame, is known as austerity of the nature of passion.
मूढग्राहेणात्मनो यत्पिडया क्रियते तपः ।परस्योत्सादनार्थं वा तत्तामसमुदाहृतम् ॥१९॥
mūḍha-grāheṇātmano yat pīḍayā kriyate tapaḥparasyotsādanārthaṁ vā tat tāmasam udāhṛtam [19]
tat tapaḥ–That austerity; yat–which; kriyate–is performed; mūḍha-grāheṇa–with dubious intent; pīḍayā–causing pain; ātmanaḥ–to oneself; vā–or; utsādana-artham–for harming; parasya–others; udāhṛtam–is described as; tāmasam–ignorant. [19]
19 That austerity which is performed with dubious intent, causing self-torture, or meant to harm others, is known as austerity of the nature of ignorance.
दातव्यमिति यद्दानं दीयतेऽनुपकारिणे ।देशे काले च पात्रे च तद्दानं सात्त्विकं स्मृतम् ॥२०॥
dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ dīyate ’nupakāriṇedeśe kāle cha pātre cha tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam [20]
dānam–The gift; yat–which; dīyate–is given; anupakāriṇe iti–without expectation of return; deśe–at an auspicious or holy place; kāle cha–at an astrologically auspicious time; pātre–to a qualified recipient; dātavyam cha–and with the conviction that it ought to be given; tat dānam–that gift; smṛtam–is considered; sāttvikam–to be of the nature of goodness. [20]
20 The gift which is given without expectation of return, with the conviction that it ought to be given, at an appropriate place and time, and to an appropriate recipient, is considered to be of the nature of goodness.
यत्तु प्रत्युपकारार्थं फलमुद्दिश्य वा पुनः ।दीयते च परिक्लिष्टं तद्दानं राजसं स्मृतम् ॥२१॥
yat tu praty-upakārārthaṁ phalam uddiśya vā punaḥdīyate cha parikliṣṭaṁ tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam [21]
yat tu–And that which; dīyate–is given; prati-upakāra-artham–with expectation of return; vā–or; phalam uddiśya–for the purpose of a reward; punaḥ cha–and moreover; parikliṣṭam–(is given) begrudgingly; tat dānam–that gift; smṛtam–is considered; rājasam–to be of the nature of passion. [21]
21 Otherwise, the gift begrudgingly given in expectation of gaining something in return, or with a desire for a reward (such as the attainment of heaven), is considered to be of the nature of passion.
अदेशकाले यद्दानमपात्रेभ्यश्च दीयते ।असत्कृतमवज्ञातं तत्तामसमुदाहृतम् ॥२२॥
adeśa-kāle yad dānam apātrebhyaś cha dīyateasatkṛtam avajñātaṁ tat tāmasam udāhṛtam [22]
yat dānam–That gift which; dīyate–is given; asat-kṛtam–disrespectfully; avajñātam cha–and scornfully; adeśa-kāle–at an improper place and time; apātrebhyaḥ–to an undeserving recipient; tat–that gift; udāhṛtam–is described as; tāmasam–being of the nature of ignorance. [22]
22 The gift given disrespectfully and scornfully to an unworthy recipient at an improper place and time is considered to be of the nature of ignorance.
ओंत्सदिति निर्द्देशो ब्रह्मणस्त्रिविधः स्मृतः ।ब्राह्मणास्तेन वेदाश्च यज्ञाश्च विहिताः पुरा ॥२३॥
oṁ-tat-sad iti nirdeśo brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥbrāhmaṇās tena vedāś cha yajñāś cha vihitāḥ purā [23]
iti–These; tri-vidhaḥ–three words: om-tat-sat–Om Tat Sat; smṛtaḥ–are known in the scriptures as; nirdeśaḥ–indicating; brahmaṇaḥ–Brahma, the Supeme Spirit. purā–In ancient times, at the universal manifestation; brāhmaṇāḥ–the brāhmaṇs; vedāḥ cha–the Vedas; yajñāḥ cha–and sacrifices; vihitāḥ–were manifested; tena–by these three words. [23]
23 The scriptures say that the words Om Tat Sat indicate Brahma, the Supreme Spirit. At the time of the universal manifestation, the brāhmaṇs, the Vedas, and sacrifices were manifested by these three words.
तस्मादोमित्युदाहृत्य यज्ञदानतपःक्रियाः ।प्रवर्त्तन्ते विधानोक्ताः सततं ब्रह्मवादिनाम् ॥२४॥
tasmād om ity udāhṛtya yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥpravartante vidhānoktāḥ satataṁ brahma-vādinām [24]
tasmāt–Therefore; vidhāna-uktāḥ–scripturally prescribed; yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ–duties of sacrifice, charity, and austerity; brahma-vādinām–of the followers of the Vedas; satatam pravartante–are always initiated; udāhṛtya–uttering; om iti–the syllable Om, representing Brahma, the Absolute. [24]
24 Thus the followers of the Vedas always utter the syllable Om representing Brahma, the Absolute, to initiate their prescribed duties of sacrifice, charity, and austerity.
तदित्यनभिसन्धाय फलं यज्ञतपःक्रियाः ।दानक्रियाश्च विविधाः क्रियन्ते मोक्षकाङ्क्षिभिः ॥२५॥
tad ity anabhisandhāya phalaṁ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥdāna-kriyāś cha vividhāḥ kriyante mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ [25]
mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ–Persons aspiring for liberation; (udāhṛtya)–uttering; tat iti–the word Tat, representing Brahma, the Absolute; kriyante–perform; vividhāḥ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ–acts of various kinds of sacrifice and austerity; dāna-kriyāḥ cha–and acts of charity; anabhisandhāya–without motivation; phalam–for the fruits. [25]
25 Persons aspiring for liberation utter the word Tat, representing Brahma, the Absolute, to invoke the performance of various acts of sacrifice, charity, and austerity without motivation for the results.
सद्भावे साधुभावे च सदित्येतत्प्रयुज्यते ।प्रशस्ते कर्म्मणि तथा सच्छब्दः पार्थ युज्यते ॥२६॥
sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve cha sad ity etat prayujyatepraśaste karmaṇi tathā sach chhabdaḥ pārtha yujyate [26]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; sat iti–the word Sat, representing Brahma, the Absolute; prayujyate–is used; sat-bhāve–to indicate truth, the nature of Brahma; sādhu-bhāve cha–and persons dedicated to the truth, knowers of Brahma. tathā–Therefore; etat sat-śabdaḥ–this word Sat; yujyate–is uttered; praśaste karmaṇi–during auspicious activities. [26]
26 O Pārtha, the word Sat, representing Brahma, the Absolute, indicates the truth and persons dedicated to the truth. Therefore, the word Sat is uttered to invoke the performance of auspicious activities.
यज्ञे तपसि दाने च स्थितिः सदिति चोच्यते ।कर्म्म चैव तदर्थीयं सदित्येवाभिधीयते ॥२७॥
yajñe tapasi dāne cha sthitiḥ sad iti chochyatekarma chaiva tad-arthīyaṁ sad ity evābhidhīyate [27]
sthitiḥ–The eternality; yajñe–in sacrifice; tapasi–austerity; dāne cha–and charity; uchyate–is described; sat iti cha–by this word Sat. karma cha eva–And action; tat-arthīyam–for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord; abhidhīyate–is designated; sat iti eva–by the word Sat. [27]
27 The word Sat is said to indicate the eternality of sacrifice, austerity, and charity. And action for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord is called Sat—truth.
अश्रद्धया हुतं दत्तं तपस्तप्तं कृतञ्च यत् ।असदित्युच्यते पार्थ न च तत्प्रेत्य नो इह ॥२८॥
aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ tapas taptaṁ kṛtañ cha yatasad ity uchyate pārtha na cha tat pretya no iha [28]
(he) pārtha–O Arjuna; yat–whatever; hutam–sacrifice is offered; dattam–charity is given; tapaḥ taptam–austerity is endured; cha–and; kṛtam–action is performed; aśraddhayā–without faith; tat–that; uchyate–is described; asat iti–as asat, untruth; (yataḥ tat)–because that; (phalati)–fructifies; na u iha–neither in this world; na cha pretya–nor the next. [28]
28 O Pārtha, sacrifice, charity, and austerity or any action performed without faith in the Supreme is known as asat, or untruth. Such works cannot bring an auspicious result, either in this world or the next.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे श्रद्धात्रयविभागयोगो नाम सप्तदशोऽध्यायः ॥१७॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde śraddhātraya-vibhāga-yogo nāma sapta-daśo ’dhyāyaḥ [17]
End of Chapter SeventeenThe Three Types of Faithfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
एकादशोऽध्यायः
Chapter Eighteen Mokṣa-yoga The Path of Liberation
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
सन्न्यासस्य महाबाहो तत्त्वमिच्छामि वेदितुम् ।त्यागस्य च हृषीकेश पृथक्केशिनिसूदन ॥१॥
arjuna uvācha
sannyāsasya mahā-bāho tattvam ichchhāmi veditumtyāgasya cha hṛṣīkeśa pṛthak keśinisūdana [1]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) mahā-bāho–O mighty hero; (he) hṛṣīkeśa–O Lord of all senses; (he) keśinisūdana–O slayer of the Keśi demon; ichchāmi–I wish; veditum–to understand; tattvam–the subject; sannyāsasya–of renunciation; tyāgasya cha–and detachment; pṛthak–separately. [1]
1 Arjuna said: O almighty Lord, slayer of the demon Keśi, I wish to understand the subject of renunciation (sannyās) and detachment (tyāga), separately.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
काम्यानां कर्म्मणां न्यासं सन्न्यासं कवयो विदुः ।सर्व्वकर्म्मफलत्यागं प्राहुस्त्यागं विचक्षणाः ॥२॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥsarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ prāhus tyāgaṁ vichakṣaṇāḥ [2]
śrī-bhagavān uvācha–The Supreme Lord said: kavayaḥ–the learned; vichakṣaṇāḥ–enlightened personalities; viduḥ–know; nyāsam–renunciation; karmaṇām–of actions; kāmyānām–that are motivated by fruitive desires; sannyāsam–as sannyās, renunciation; prāhuḥ–and they say that; sarva-karma-phala-tyāgam–the renunciation of the fruits of all actions, whether daily, incidental, or fruitive; tyāgam–is detachment. [2]
2 The Supreme Lord said: Learned, enlightened persons know the giving up of fruitive action as renunciation, and the giving up of the fruits of all action as detachment.
त्याज्यं दोषवदित्येके कर्म्म प्राहुर्मनीषिणः ।यज्ञदानतपःकर्म्म न त्याज्यमिति चापरे ॥३॥
tyājyaṁ doṣavad ity eke karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥyajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma na tyājyam iti chāpare [3]
eke manīṣiṇaḥ–Some scholars (generally the sāṅkhyas); prāhuḥ–declare that; karma–action; tyājyam–should be given up; doṣavat iti–as imperfect (due to violence, etc.); apare cha–and others (generally the mīmāṁsakas); iti (prāhuh)–say that; yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma–(scripturally enjoined) action of the nature of sacrifice, charity, and austerity; na tyājyam–should not be abandoned. [3]
3 Some philosophers hold that action should be renounced as imperfect. Others hold that action of the nature of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should never be given up.
निश्चयं शृणु मे तत्र त्यागे भरतसत्तम ।त्यागो हि पुरुषव्याघ्र त्रिविधः सम्प्रकीर्त्तितः ॥४॥
niśchayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra tyāge bharata-sattamatyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ [4]
(he) bharata-sattama–O best of the Bhāratas; śṛṇu–hear; me–My; niśchayam–perfect conclusion; tatra tyāge–concerning tyāga, detachment, or the quality of renunciation; hi–since; (he) puruṣa-vyāghra–O best of men; tyāgaḥ–the quality of renunciation; samprakīrtitaḥ–has been clearly described (in the scriptures); tri-vidhaḥ–to be of three types. [4]
4 O best of the Bhāratas, hear My perfect conclusion concerning detachment, the quality of renunciation, since, O best of men, it has been clearly established that the quality of renunciation is of three types.
यज्ञदानतपःकर्म्म न त्याज्यं कार्य्यमेव तत् ।यज्ञो दानं तपश्चैव पावनानि मनीषिणाम् ॥५॥
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tatyajño dānaṁ tapaś chaiva pāvanāni manīṣiṇām [5]
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma–Duties of sacrifice, charity, and austerity, etc.; na tyājyam–should not be given up. tat–They; eva–certainly; kāryam–must be performed; (yataḥ)–because; yajñaḥ–sacrifice; dānam–charity; tapaḥ cha–and austerity; (bhavanti)–are; pāvanāni eva–the purifiers; manīṣiṇām–of the wise. [5]
5 Actions of the nature of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should never be abandoned. They must be performed for they are the purifiers of the wise.
एतान्यपि तु कर्म्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा फलानि च ।कर्त्तव्यानीति मे पार्थ निश्चितं मतमुत्तमम् ॥६॥
etāny api tu karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni chakartavyānīti me pārtha niśchitaṁ matam uttamam [6]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; api tu–but even; etāni–these; karmāṇi–actions; kartavyāni–must be performed; tyaktvā–renouncing; saṅgam–attachment; phalāni cha–and desire for the results. iti–This is; me–My; niśchitam–definite; uttamam–supreme; matam–perfect conclusion (siddhānta). [6]
6 But even these actions must be performed abandoning attachment and fruitive desire. O Pārtha, know this to be My perfect, supreme conclusion.
नियतस्य तु सन्न्यासः कर्म्मणो नोपपद्यते ।मोहात्तस्य परित्यागस्तामसः परिकीर्त्तितः ॥७॥
niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ karmaṇo nopapadyatemohāt tasya parityāgas tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ [7]
tu–But; sannyāsaḥ–renunciation; niyatasya–of obligatory; karmaṇaḥ–duties; na upapadyate–cannot be justified. parityāgaḥ–Abandonment; tasya–of those duties; mohāt–out of delusion; parikīrtitaḥ–is called; tāmasaḥ–renunciation of the nature of ignorance. [7]
7 Renunciation of one’s obligatory duties is wrong. The delusion of giving up these duties is called false renunciation, or renunciation of the nature of ignorance.
दुःखमित्येव यत्कर्म्म कायक्लेशभयात्त्यजेत् ।स कृत्वा राजसं त्यागं नैव त्यागफलं लभेत् ॥८॥
duḥkham ity eva yat karma kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajetsa kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet [8]
(yaḥ)–That person who; iti (matvā)–thinks that; yat karma–such obligatory duties; duḥkham eva–are troublesome; tyajet–and renounces them; kāya-kleśa-bhayāt–out of fear of physical discomfort; saḥ–that person; kṛtvā–by performing; tyāgam–renunciation; rājasam–of the nature of passion; na labhet eva–cannot attain; tyāga-phalam–the fruit of detachment—enlightenment. [8]
8 One who abandons his obligatory duties out of fear of physical discomfort, considering them troublesome, performs renunciation of the nature of passion. Thus, he does not attain the fruit of true detachment.
कार्य्यमित्येव यत्कर्म्म नियतं क्रियतेऽर्ज्जुन ।सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा फलञ्चैव स त्यागः सात्त्विको मतः ॥९॥
kāryam ity eva yat karma niyataṁ kriyate ’rjunasaṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalañ chaiva sa tyāgaḥ sāttviko mataḥ [9]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; niyatam–obligatory; karma–duties; yat–which; kriyate–are performed; kāryam iti eva–as a matter of duty; tyaktvā–abandoning; saṅgam–attachment; phalam eva cha–and fruitive desire; saḥ tyāgaḥ sāttvikaḥ–constitute renunciation of the nature of goodness; (me) mataḥ–in My consideration. [9]
9 O Arjuna, performance of obligatory works as a matter of duty while abandoning attachment and fruitive desire, is renunciation of the nature of goodness. This is My opinion.
न द्वेष्ट्यकुशलं कर्म्म कुशले नानुषज्जते ।त्यागी सत्त्वसमाविष्टो मेधावी छिन्नसंशयः ॥१०॥
na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma kuśale nānuṣajjatetyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo medhāvī chhinna-saṁśayaḥ [10]
medhāvī–The wise; tyāgī–renunciate; sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ–absorbed in the nature of goodness; chhinna-saṁśayaḥ–having slashed all doubts; na dveṣṭi–neither resents; akuśalam–troublesome; karma–duties; na anuṣajjate–nor is attached to; kuśale–duties which bestow happiness. [10]
10 The wise renunciate who is absorbed in the nature of goodness, and who has slashed all doubts, neither resents disagreeable duties nor is attached to agreeable works.
न हि देहभृता शक्यं त्यक्तुं कर्म्माण्यशेषतः ।यस्तु कर्म्मफलत्यागी स त्यागीत्यभिधीयते ॥११॥
na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ tyaktuṁ karmāṇy aśeṣataḥyas tu karma-phala-tyāgī sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate [11]
deha-bhṛtā–The embodied soul; na śakyam hi–can never; aśeṣataḥ–fully; tyaktum–renounce; karmāṇi–actions; tu–however; abhidhīyate–it is said; iti–that; yaḥ saḥ karma-phala-tyāgī–one who renounces the fruits of action; tyāgī–is a renunciate. [11]
11 It is not possible for the embodied soul to fully renounce actions. However, one who renounces the fruits of his actions is a true renunciate.
अनिष्टमिष्टं मिश्रञ्च त्रिविधं कर्म्मणः फलम् ।भवत्यत्यागिनां प्रेत्य न तु सन्न्यासिनां क्वचित् ॥१२॥
aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśrañ cha tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalambhavaty atyāgināṁ pretya na tu sannyāsināṁ kvachit [12]
tri-vidham phalam (iti)–These three kinds of fruits; karmaṇaḥ–of action; bhavati–remain; pretya–after death; atyāginām–for those who desire material enjoyment: aniṣṭam–undesirable (low or hellish birth); iṣṭam–desirable (high or godly birth); miśram cha–and mixed (human birth); tu–but; na (bhavati)–these fruits do not ensue; kvachit–at any time; sannyāsinām–for those who are sannyāsī, renounced. [12]
12 After death, the three kinds of fruits of actions—good, bad, and mixed—accrue to those who have worldly desires, but never to those who are renounced.
पञ्चैतानि महाबाहो कारणानि निबोध मे ।साङ्ख्ये कृतान्ते प्रोक्तानि सिद्धये सर्व्वकर्म्मणाम् ॥१३॥
pañchaitāni mahā-bāho kāraṇāni nibodha mesāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām [13]
(he) mahā-bāho–O mighty hero; nibodha–know; me–from Me; etāni–these; pañcha–five; kāraṇāni–causes; siddhaye–of the accomplishment; sarva-karmaṇām–of all actions; proktāni–described; kṛtānte–in the conclusive knowledge of action; sāṅkhye–in the Vedānta scripture. [13]
13 O mighty hero, know from Me of the five causes of the accomplishment of all actions as described in the conclusive teachings of the scripture known as Sāṅkhya or Vedānta:
अधिष्ठानं तथा कर्त्ता करणञ्च पृथग्विधम् ।विविधाश्च पृथक्चेष्टा दैवञ्चैवात्र पञ्चमम् ॥१४॥
adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā karaṇañ cha pṛthag-vidhamvividhāś cha pṛthak cheṣṭā daivañ chaivātra pañchamam [14]
adhiṣṭānam–(1) The basis, the body; tathā–and; kartā–(2) the ‘doer’, the ego of the knot of spirit and matter; pṛthak-vidham–(3) the separate, various; karaṇam cha–senses—eyes, ears, etc., as the instrument; vividhāḥ–(4) the various; pṛthak cha–and separate; cheṣṭā–endeavours or functions of the vital airs; atra pañchamam–and the fifth factor; daivam eva cha–(5) is the Divine, the Supersoul. [14]
14 (All actions are accomplished by these five causes:) The body, the performer (ego, a knot of spirit and matter), the instrument (the senses), the various endeavours, and the Divine (the Supersoul).
शरीरवाङ्मनोभिर्यत्कर्म्म प्रारभते नरः ।न्यायं वा विपरीतं वा पञ्चैते तस्य हेतवः ॥१५॥
śarīra-vāṅmanobhir yat karma prārabhate naraḥnyāyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā pañchaite tasya hetavaḥ [15]
yat karma–Whatever action; naraḥ–a man; prārabhate–performs; sarīra-vāk-manobhiḥ–with his body, speech, and mind; nyāyam vā–whether lawful; viparītam vā–or unlawful; ete pañcha–these five; tasya–are its; hetavaḥ–causes. [15]
15 Whether lawful of unlawful, whatever action a man performs with his body, mind, or speech, is caused by these five elements.
तत्रैवं सति कर्त्तारमात्मानं केवलं तु यः ।पश्यत्यकृतबुद्धित्वान्न स पश्यति दुर्म्मतिः ॥१६॥
tatraivaṁ sati kartāram ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥpaśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān na sa paśyati durmatiḥ [16]
tatra–In this respect; evam sati tu–despite this; yaḥ–whoever; paśyati–sees; kevalam–only; ātmānam–the living being; kartāram–as the doer; saḥ durmatiḥ–that ignorant person; akṛta-buddhitvāt–due to impure intelligence; na paśyati–does not see. [16]
16 But an ignorant person who sees only himself as the doer does not actually see, due to his impure intelligence.
यस्य नाहङ्कृतो भावो बुद्धिर्यस्य न लिप्यते ।हत्वापि स इमाँल्लोकान्न हन्ति न निबध्यते ॥१७॥
yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo buddhir yasya na lipyatehatvāpi sa imā̐l lokān na hanti na nibadhyate [17]
yasya–He within whom; bhāvaḥ–the mentality; ahaṅkṛtaḥ–of considering oneself a doer; na–does not occur; yasya–and he whose; buddhiḥ–intelligence; na lipyate–is not attached to the fruits of actions; saḥ–such a person; hatvā api–even if he kills; imān lokān–the entire world; na hanti–he neither kills anyone; na nibadhyate–nor is he bound by action. [17]
17 He who is free from egoism (aversion to the Absolute), and whose intelligence is not implicated in worldly action—even if he kills the entire world, he neither kills nor is he bound by action.
ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं परिज्ञाता त्रिविधा कर्म्मचोदना ।करणं कर्म्म कर्त्तेति त्रिविधः कर्म्मसन्ग्रहः ॥१८॥
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā tri-vidhā karma-chodanākaraṇaṁ karma karteti tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ [18]
tri-vidhā iti–These three are; karma-chodanā–the driving force of action: jñānam–knowledge; jñeyam–the knowable; parijñātā–the knower. tri-vidhaḥ (iti)–These three are; karma-saṅgrahaḥ–the constitution of action: karaṇam–the instrument, the senses; or the practice to attain the objective (sādhana); karma–the action; kartā–the performer. [18]
18 These three are the driving force of action: knowledge, the knowable, and the knower. These three are the constitution of action—the instrument, the action, and the performer.
ज्ञानं कर्म्म च कर्त्ता च त्रिधैव गुणभेदतः ।प्रोच्यते गुणसङ्ख्याने यथावच्छृणु तान्यपि ॥१९॥
jñānaṁ karma cha kartā cha tridhaiva guṇa-bhedataḥprochyate guṇa-saṅkhyāne yathāvach chhṛṇu tāny api [19]
guṇa-saṅkhyāne–In the sāṅkhya scripture; jñānam–knowledge; karma cha–action; kartā cha–and the performer; (ete) prochyate–are mentioned; tri-dhā eva–in three divisions; guṇa-bhedataḥ–according to the three modes of material nature. śṛṇu–now hear; tāni api–of these, too; yathāvat–as it is. [19]
19 In the sāṅkhya scripture, knowledge, action, and the performer have each been classified according to the three modes of material nature. Now hear of these from Me:
सर्व्वभूतेषु येनैकं भावमव्ययमीक्षते ।अविभक्तं विभक्तेषु तज्ज्ञानं विद्धि सात्त्विकम् ॥२०॥
sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ bhāvam avyayam īkṣateavibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu taj jñānaṁ viddhi sāttvikam [20]
viddhi–You should know; tat jñānam–that knowledge; yena–by which; ekam–one; avibhaktam–undivided; avyayam–imperishable; bhāvam–nature; īkṣate–is seen; vibhakteṣu sarva-bhūteṣu–within all the diverse living beings; sāttvikam–as knowledge of the nature of goodness. [20]
20 That knowledge by which the one imperishable and undivided principle (My superior divine potency) is seen to be present in all the diverse living beings is to be known as knowledge of the nature of goodness.
पृथक्त्वेन तु यज्ज्ञानं नानाभावान्पृथग्विधान् ।वेत्ति सर्व्वेषु भूतेषु तज्ज्ञानं विद्धि राजसम् ॥२१॥
pṛthaktvena tu yaj jñānaṁ nānā-bhāvān-pṛthag-vidhānvetti sarveṣu bhūteṣu taj jñānaṁ viddhi rājasam [21]
yat jñānam–That knowledge by which; vetti–one experiences; sarveṣu–within all; bhūteṣu–living beings; pṛthaktvena–separately; nānā-bhāvān–many natures; pṛthak-vidhān–engaged in many pursuits; viddhi–know; tat jñānaṁ tu–that knowledge; rājasam–to be of the nature of passion. [21]
21 That knowledge in which one experiences in the plane of living beings many separate (independent) entities engaged in many separate (clashing) pursuits is to be known as knowledge of the nature of passion.
यत्तु कृत्स्नवदेकस्मिन्कार्य्ये सक्तमहैतुकम् ।अतत्त्वार्थवदल्पञ्च तत्तामसमुदाहृतम् ॥२२॥
yat tu kṛtsnavad ekasmin kārye saktam ahaitukamatattvārthavad alpañ cha tat tāmasam udāhṛtam [22]
tat–That; yat tu–which; saktam–is attached; ekasmin kārye–to the peripheral only, such as the body; kṛtsnavat–as everything; ahaitukam–(and which is) irrational; atattva-arthavat–not seeking the truth—without spiritual or scriptural conception; alpam cha–and trivial; udāhṛtam–is said to be; tāmasam–knowledge of the nature of ignorance. [22]
22 And that ideology which is stubbornly attached to the peripheral only, considering it to be all-in-all, without spiritual or scriptural conception, without seeking the truth, and based on trivialities alone, is said to be knowledge of the (animalistic) nature of ignorance.
नियतं सङ्गरहितमरागद्वेषतः कृतम् अफलप्रेप्सुना कर्म्म यत्तत्सात्त्विकमुच्यते ॥२३॥
niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtamaphala-prepsunā karma yat tat sāttvikam uchyate [23]
tat karma yat–That action which is; niyatam–constantly; kṛtam–performed; saṅga-rahitam–without attachment; aphala-prepsunā–by a person without fruitive desire; arāga-dveṣataḥ–unbiased by likes and dislikes; uchyate–is called; sāttvikam–action of the nature of goodness. [23]
23 That obligatory action which is faithfully executed without attachment by a person who does not seek its rewards and who is unbiased by likes and dislikes, is said to be action of the nature of goodness.
यत्तु कामेप्सुना कर्म्म साहङ्कारेण वा पुनः ।क्रियते बहुलायासं तद्राजसमुदाहृतम् ॥२४॥
yat tu kāmepsunā karma sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥkriyate bahulāyāsaṁ tad rājasam udāhṛtam [24]
punaḥ–Again; tat karma yat tu–that action which is; kriyate–performed; kāma-īpsunā–by one desiring the result; vā–or; sa-ahaṅkāreṇa–by an egotistic person; bahula-āyāsam–with great endeavour; udāhṛtam–is said to be; rājasam–of the nature of passion. [24]
24 And that action which is performed with great endeavour by an egotistic person desiring its fruits, is said to be action of the nature of passion.
अनुबन्धं क्षयं हिंसामनपेक्ष्य च पौरुषम् ।मोहादारभ्यते कर्म्म यत्तत्तामसमुच्यते ॥२५॥
anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām anapekṣya cha pauruṣammohād ārabhyate karma yat tat tāmasam uchyate [25]
tat karma yat–That action which; ārabhyate–is undertaken; mohāt–due to delusion; anapekṣya–without considering; anubandham–consequence; kṣayam–loss; hiṁsām–harm to others; pauruṣam cha–and one’s capability of performing it; uchyate–is called; tāmasam–action of the nature of ignorance. [25]
25 And that work which is undertaken out of delusion, without consideration for its consequences, its loss, harm to others, and one’s capability of performing it, is called action of the nature of ignorance.
मुक्तसङ्गोऽनहंवादी धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः ।सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योर्निर्व्विकारः कर्त्ता सात्त्विक उच्यते ॥२६॥
mukta-saṅgo ’nahaṁvādī dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥsiddhy-asiddhyor nirvikāraḥ kartā sāttvika uchyate [26]
mukta-saṅgaḥ–Unattached; anaham-vādi–without ego; dhṛti-utsāha-samanvitaḥ–patient, enthusiastic; kartā–the worker; nirvikāraḥ–who is unaffected; siddhi-asiddhyoḥ–in success or failure; uchyate–is called; sāttvikaḥ–a worker of the nature of goodness. [26]
26 The worker who is unattached, without ego, patient, enthusiastic, and unaffected in success or failure, is known as a worker of the nature of goodness.
रागी कर्म्मफलप्रेप्सुर्लुब्धो हिंसात्मकोऽशुचिः ।हर्षशोकान्वितः कर्त्ता राजसः परिकीर्त्तितः ॥२७॥
rāgī karma-phala-prepsur lubdho hiṁsātmako ’śuchiḥharṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ [27]
rāgī–The attached; karma-phala-prepsuḥ–desirer of the fruits of action; lubdhaḥ–covetous; hiṁsā-ātmakaḥ–cruel-natured; kartā–worker; aśuchiḥ–engaged in unscriptural or abominable practices; harṣa-śoka-anvitaḥ–and always subject to joy and sorrow; parikīrtitaḥ–is called; rājasaḥ–a worker of the nature of passion. [27]
27 The worker who is attached, desirous of the fruits of action, covetous, cruel, engaged in abominable practices not sanctioned by the scriptures, and always subject to joy and sorrow, is known as a worker of the nature of passion.
अयुक्तः प्राकृतः स्तब्धः शठो नैष्कृतिकोऽलसः ।विषादी दीर्घसूत्री च कर्त्ता तामस उच्यते ॥२८॥
ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥviṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī cha kartā tāmasa uchyate [28]
ayuktaḥ–The uncontrolled; prākṛtaḥ–vulgar; stabdhaḥ–stubbornly arrogant; śaṭhaḥ–deceitful; naiṣkṛtikaḥ–offensive; alasaḥ–lazy; viṣādī–despondent; dīrgha-sūtrī cha–procrastinating; kartā–worker; uchyate–is called; tāmasaḥ–a worker of the nature of ignorance. [28]
28 The worker who is uncontrolled, vulgar, arrogant, deceitful, offensive, lazy, despondent, and a procrastinator is known as a worker of the nature of ignorance.
बुद्धेर्भेदं धृतेश्चैव गुणतस्त्रिविधं शृणु ।प्रोच्यमानमशेषेण पृथक्त्वेन धनञ्जय ॥२९॥
buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś chaiva guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇuprochyamānam aśeṣeṇa pṛthaktvena dhanañjaya [29]
(he) dhanañjaya–O Arjuna; śṛṇu–hear; prochyamānam–as I describe; aśeṣeṇa–fully; pṛthaktvena–and distinctly; tri-vidham bhedam–the three types; buddheḥ–of intelligence; dhṛteḥ cha eva–and determination; guṇataḥ–according to the modes of nature. [29]
29 O Dhanañjaya, now listen attentively. I shall clearly describe the three types of intelligence and determination, according to the modes of nature:
प्रवृत्तिञ्च निवृत्तिञ्च कार्य्याकार्य्ये भयाभये ।बन्धं मोक्षञ्च या वेत्ति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी ॥३०॥
pravṛttiñ cha nivṛttiñ cha kāryākārye bhayābhayebandhaṁ mokṣañ cha yā vetti buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī [30]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; sāttvikī buddhiḥ–intelligence of the nature of goodness; sā yā–is that which; vetti–distinguishes; pravṛttim cha–virtuous engagement; nivṛttim cha–and abstinence from vice; kārya-akārye–duty and non-duty; bhaya-abhaye–danger and safety; bandham mokṣam cha–and bondage and liberation. [30]
30 O Pārtha, intelligence of the nature of goodness is that which can distinguish (virtuous) engagement and abstinence (from vice), duty and non-duty, danger and safety, and bondage and liberation.
यया धर्म्ममधर्म्मञ्च कार्य्यञ्चाकार्य्यमेव च ।अयथावत्प्रजानाति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ राजसी ॥३१॥
yayā dharmam adharmañ cha kāryañ chākāryam eva chaayathāvat prajānāti buddhiḥ sā pārtha rājasī [31]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; rājasī buddhiḥ–intelligence of the nature of passion; sā yayā–is that by which; dharmam–religion; adharmam cha–and irreligion; kāryam cha–and duty; akāryam eva cha–and non-duty; prajānāti ayathāvat–are misunderstood. [31]
31 O Pārtha, intelligence of the nature of passion is that which causes an erroneous perception of religion, irreligion, duty, and non-duty.
अधर्म्मं धर्म्ममिति या मन्यते तमसावृता ।सर्व्वार्थान्विपरीतांश्च बुद्धिः सा पार्थ तामसी ॥३२॥
adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā manyate tamasāvṛtāsarvārthān viparītāṁś cha buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī [32]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; tāmasī buddhiḥ–intelligence of the nature of ignorance; āvṛtā–covered; tamasā–by the mode of ignorance; sā yā–is that which; manyate–considers; adharmam–vice; dharmam–virtue; sarva-arthān cha–and all knowable objects; viparītān iti–contrary to what they are. [32]
32 Intelligence of the nature of ignorance is covered by illusion, whereby vice is considered virtue, and everything is taken to be the opposite of the reality.
धृत्या यया धारयते मनःप्राणेन्द्रियक्रियाः ।योगेनाव्यभिचारिण्या धृतिः सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी ॥३३॥
dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥyogenāvyabhichāriṇyā dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī [33]
(he) pārtha–O Pārtha; yayā avyabhichāriṇyā dhṛtyā–that unwavering determination which; yogena–with single-minded concentration; dhārayate–controls; manaḥ-prāṇa-indriya-kriyāḥ–the functions of the mind, life forces, and senses; sā dhṛtiḥ sāttvikī–is determination of the nature of goodness. [33]
33 O Pārtha, determination of the nature of goodness is that determination which unfailingly and with single-minded concentration controls the functions of the mind, the life-airs, and the senses.
यया तु धर्म्मकामार्थान्धृत्या धारयतेऽर्ज्जुन ।प्रसङ्गेन फलाकाङ्क्षी धृतिः सा पार्थ राजसी ॥३४॥
yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjunaprasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī [34]
tu–But; (he) pārtha arjuna–O Pārtha, Arjuna; yayā dhṛtyā–determination by which; dharma-kāma-arthān–religiosity, desire, and wealth; dhārayate–are held; (prādhānyena)–foremost; prasaṅgena–by the contact of which; (bhavati)–one becomes; phala-ākāṅkṣī–desirous of their fruits; sā dhṛtiḥ–that determination; rājasī–is of the nature of passion. [34]
34 O Pārtha, O Arjuna, determination of the nature of passion is that fruitive, attached determination which adheres to religiosity for the purpose of amassing wealth to fulfill mundane desires.
यया स्वप्नं भयं शोकं विषादं मदमेव च ।न विमुञ्चति दुर्म्मेधा धृतिः सा तामसी मता ॥३५॥
yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ viṣādaṁ madam eva chana vimuñchati durmedhā dhṛtiḥ sā tāmasī matā [35]
sā dhṛtiḥ–That determination; yayā–by which; durmedhāḥ–a foolish person; na vimuñchati–never leaves; svapnam–sleep; bhayam–fear; śokam–sorrow; viṣādam–depression; madam eva cha–pride, arrogance; matā–is considered; tāmasī–determination of the nature of ignorance. [35]
35 Determination of the nature of ignorance is that by which a foolish person does not give up sleep, fear, sorrow, depression, and arrogance.
सुखं त्विदानीं त्रिविधं शृणु मे भरतर्षभ ।अभ्यासाद्रमते यत्र दुःखान्तञ्च निगच्छति ॥३६।
यत्तदग्रे विषमिव परिणामेऽमृतोपमम् ।तत्सुखं सात्त्विकं प्रोक्तमात्मबुद्धिप्रसादजम् ॥३७॥
sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu me bharatarṣabhaabhyāsād ramate yatra duḥkhāntañ cha nigachchhati [36]
yat tad agre viṣam iva pariṇāme ’mṛtopamamtat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam [37]
(he) bharatarṣabha–O best of the Bhāratas; idānīm tu–now; śṛṇu–hear; me–from Me; tri-vidham sukham–about the three kinds of happiness: yatra–that in which; ramate–one delights; abhyāsāt–through his practices; nigachchhati cha–and attains; duḥkha-antam–the cessation of unhappiness; yat tat–and that which; agre–initially; viṣam iva–is like poison; pariṇāme–and subsequently; amṛta-upamam–like nectar; tat sukham–such happiness; ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam–born of the purity of self-realisation; proktam–is called; sāttvikam–happiness of the nature of goodness. [36–37]
36–37 O Bharatarṣabha, now hear from Me about the three kinds of happiness: That state in which one is joyful through his practices while attaining the cessation of all unhappiness, and which in the beginning is like poison but ultimately like nectar, and which is born of the purity of self-realisation—that happiness is said to be of the nature of goodness.
विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगाद्यत्तदग्रेऽमृतोपमम् ।परिणामे विषमिव तत्सुखं राजसं स्मृतम् ॥३८।
viṣayendriya-saṁyogād yat tad agre ’mṛtopamampariṇāme viṣam iva tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam [38]
tat yat–That which; (jāyate)–is born; viṣaya-indriya-saṁyogāt–from the contact of the senses with their objects; agre–and in the beginning; amṛta-upamam–is like nectar; pariṇāme–and subsequently; viṣam iva–like poison; tat sukham–that happiness; smṛtam–is called; rājasam–happiness of the nature of passion. [38]
38 That happiness which is born of the contact of the senses with their objects, and which is like nectar in the beginning but poison in the end, is said to be happiness of the nature of passion.
यदग्रे चानुबन्धे च सुखं मोहनमात्मनः ।निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्थं तत्तामसमुदाहृतम् ॥३९॥
yad agre chānubandhe cha sukhaṁ mohanam ātmanaḥnidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ tat tāmasam udāhṛtam [39]
nidrā-ālasya-pramāda-uttham–Born of sleep, laziness, and illusion; yat sukham–that happiness which; agre cha–in the beginning; anubandhe cha–and in the end; ātmanaḥ mohanam–is self-deception; tat–such happiness; udāhṛtam–is called; tāmasam–happiness of the nature of ignorance. [39]
39 That happiness which is self-deception from beginning to end, and which arises from sleep, laziness, and illusion, is called happiness of the nature of ignorance.
न तदस्ति पृथिव्यां वा दिवि देवेषु वा पुनः ।सत्त्वं प्रकृतिजैर्मुक्तं यदेभिः स्यात्त्रिभिर्गुणैः ॥४०॥
na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā divi deveṣu vā punaḥsattvaṁ prakṛti-jair muktaṁ yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ [40]
pṛthivyām vā–Either on earth; (manuṣyādiṣu)–amongst the humans, etc.; vā punaḥ–or again; divi–in the heavenly plane; deveṣu–amongst the demigods; na asti–there is no; tat sattvam–such entity; yat–which; muktam syāt–can be free; ebhiḥ tribhiḥ guṇaiḥ–from these three modes; prakṛti-jaiḥ–born of material nature. [40]
40 Amongst all species on earth including the humans or amongst even the celestial gods in the heavenly plane, there is no entity that can be free from these three modes which are born of material nature.
ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां शूद्राणाञ्च परन्तप ।कर्म्माणि प्रविभक्तानि स्वभावप्रभवैर्गुनैः ॥४१॥
brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ śūdrāṇāñ cha parantapakarmāṇi pravibhaktāni svabhāva-prabhavair gunaiḥ [41]
(he) parantapa–O vanquisher of the enemy; karmāṇi–the duties; brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśām–of the brāhmaṇ, kṣatriya, and vaiśya; śūdrāṇām cha–and śūdra sections; pravibhaktāni–are appropriately classified; guṇaiḥ–according to the qualities of goodness, passion, and ignorance; svabhāva-prabhavaiḥ–born of their natures. [41]
41 O Parantapa, according to their natures, the duties of the brāhmaṇs, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras are appropriately classified.
शमो दमस्तपः शौचं क्षान्तिरार्ज्जवमेव च ।ज्ञानं विज्ञानमास्तिक्यं ब्रह्मकर्म्म स्वभावजम् ॥४२॥
śamo damas tapaḥ śauchaṁ kṣāntir ārjavam eva chajñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [42]
(etāni)–All these; (bhavati)–are; svabhāva-jam–the natural; brahma-karma–duties of the brāhmaṇs: śamaḥ–internal sense-control; damaḥ–external sense-control; tapaḥ–austerity; śaucham–external and internal purity; kṣāntiḥ–forbearance; ārjavam eva cha–straightforwardness; jñānam–scriptural knowledge; vijñānam–realisation of essential truth; āstikyam–theistic mentality or firm faith in the teachings of the scriptures. [42]
42 Internal and external sense-control, austerity, purity, forbearance, straightforwardness, knowledge, realisation, and theistic mentality—these are the natural duties of the brāhmaṇs.
शौर्य्यं तेजो धृतिर्दाक्ष्यं युद्धे चाप्यपलायनम् ।दानमीश्वरभावश्च क्षात्रं कर्म्म स्वभावजम् ॥४३॥
śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ yuddhe chāpy apalāyanamdānam īśvara-bhāvaś cha kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam [43]
(etāni)–All these; (bhavati)–are; svabhāva-jam–the natural; kṣātram karma–duties of the kṣatriyas: śauryam–prowess; tejaḥ–valour; dhṛtiḥ–endurance; dākṣyaṁ–dexterity; apalāyanam–never retreating; yuddhe cha api–in battle; dānam–generosity; īśvara-bhāvaḥ cha–and regality. [43]
43 Prowess, valour, endurance, dexterity, never retreating in battle, generosity, and regality—these are the characteristic duties of the kṣatriyas.
कृषिगोरक्ष्यवाणिज्यं वैश्यकर्म्म स्वभावजम् ।परिचर्य्यात्मकं कर्म्म शूद्रस्यापि स्वभावजम् ॥४४॥
kṛṣi-gorakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jamparicharyātmakaṁ karma śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam [44]
(etāni)–All these; (bhavati)–are; svabhāva-jam–the natural; vaiśya-karma–functions of the vaiśyas: kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ–agriculture, cow protection, and trade. karma api–The duty; paricharyā-ātmakam–of service to the brāhmaṇs, kṣatriyas, and vaiśyas; svabhāva-jam–is natural; śūdrasya–for the śūdra section. [44]
44 Agriculture, cow protection, and trade are the natural work of the vaiśyas; and natural to the śūdras is service to the brāhmaṇs, kṣatriyas, and vaiśyas (assisting them in their various works).
स्वे स्वे कर्म्मण्यभिरतः संसिद्धिं लभते नरः ।स्वकर्म्मनिरतः सिद्धिं यथा विन्दति तच्छृणु ॥४५॥
sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥsvakarma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ yathā vindati tach chhṛṇu [45]
naraḥ–The man; abhirataḥ–devoted; sve sve karmaṇi–to his own appropriate duty; labhate–attains; saṁsiddhim–perfection in self-knowledge. śṛṇu tat–Now hear; yathā–how; svakarma-nirataḥ–one dedicated to executing his prescribed duty; vindati– attains; siddhim–perfection. [45]
45 One who devotes himself to his own duty attains perfection in self-knowledge. Now hear from Me how a person attains perfection through devotion to his own duty:
यतः प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्व्वमिदं ततम् ।स्वकर्म्मणा तमभ्यर्च्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानवः ॥४६॥
yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ yena sarvam idaṁ tatamsvakarmaṇā tam abhyarchya siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ [46]
mānavaḥ–A man; vindati–attains; siddhim–perfection; abhyarchya–by worshipping; svakarmaṇā–through his appropiate, prescribed duty; tam–that Supreme Lord; yataḥ–from whom occurs; pravṛttiḥ–the manifestation or impetus; bhūtānām–of all living beings; yena–and by whom, individually and collectively; idam–this; sarvam–entire universe; tatam–is pervaded. [46]
46 A man achieves perfection by worshipping, through his prescribed duties, the Supreme Lord from whom all beings originate, by whom all beings are engaged, and who (individually and collectively) pervades the entire universe.
श्रेयान्स्वधर्म्मो विगुणः परधर्म्मात्स्वनुष्ठितात् ।स्वभावनियतं कर्म्म कुर्व्वन्नाप्नोति किल्बिषम् ॥४७॥
śreyān svadharmo viguṇaḥ para-dharmāt svanuṣṭhitātsvabhāva-niyataṁ karma kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam [47]
svadharmaḥ–One’s own prescribed duty; viguṇaḥ–though imperfect; śreyān–is better; para-dharmāt–than another’s duties; su-anuṣṭhitāt–executed well. kurvan–By doing; karma–the duty; svabhāva-niyatam–prescribed according to his nature; (mānavaḥ)–a man; kilbiṣam na āpnoti–does not incur sin. [47]
47 One’s own duty, though imperfect, is better than another’s executed well. Sin is never incurred by a man fullfilling the duty prescribed according to his nature.
सहजं कर्म्म कौन्तेय सदोषमपि न त्यजेत् ।सर्व्वारम्भा हि दोषेण धूमेनाग्निरिवावृताः ॥४८॥
saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya sa-doṣam api na tyajetsarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ [48]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; sa-doṣam api–although imperfect; karma–action; saha-jam–prescribed according to one’s nature; na tyajet–must not be given up; hi–for; sarva-ārambhāḥ–all undertakings; āvṛtāḥ–are covered; doṣeṇa–by defects; agniḥ iva–as fire is covered; dhūmena–by smoke. [48]
48 O Kaunteya, even though it may be imperfect, one should not give up the duty prescribed according to his nature. Verily, all action (karma) is (generally) covered by imperfection, as fire is covered by smoke.
असक्तबुद्धिः सर्व्वत्र जितात्मा विगतस्पृहः।नैष्कर्म्म्यसिद्धिं परमां सन्न्यासेनाधिगच्छति ॥४९॥
asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥnaiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ sannyāsenādhigachchhati [49]
asakta-buddhiḥ–One with the wisdom of detachment; sarvatra–from all mundane objects; jita-ātmā–the self-controlled; vigata-spṛhaḥ–person whose desires have gone; adhigachchhati–attains to; paramām naiṣkarmya-siddhim–the higher state, of transcending all duties; sannyāsena–by renouncing the fruits of his actions. [49]
49 One who has the wisdom of detachment from all mundane objects, who is self-controlled, and whose desires have gone—such a person attains the perfection of transcending all duties in the world by renouncing the fruits of his actions.
सिद्धिं प्राप्तो यथा ब्रह्म तथाप्नोति निबोध मे ।समासेनैव कौन्तेय निष्ठा ज्ञानस्य या परा ॥५०॥
siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma tathāpnoti nibodha mesamāsenaiva kaunteya niṣṭhā jñānasya yā parā [50]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; yathā–how; siddhim prāptaḥ–the person who has achieved the state of transcending all duties; āpnoti–attains to; brahma–Brahma, the Absolute; yā parā niṣṭhā–the ultimate state; jñānasya–of knowledge; tathā nibodha–now understand that; samāsena eva–in brief; me–from Me. [50]
50 O Kaunteya, now know from Me in brief how the person who has attained transcendence of all duties reaches the transcendental plane of the Absolute, the ultimate state of knowledge (spiritual awakening):
बुद्ध्या विशुद्धया युक्तो धृत्यात्मानं नियम्य च ।शब्दादीन्विषयांस्त्यक्त्वा रागद्वेषौ व्युदस्य च ॥५१॥
विविक्तसेवी लघ्वाशी यतवाक्कायमानसः ।ध्यानयोगपरो नित्यं वैराग्यं समुपाश्रितः ॥५२॥
अहङ्कारं बलं दर्पं कामं क्रोधं परिग्रहम् ।विमुच्य निर्म्ममः शान्तो ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ॥५३॥
buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya chaśabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā rāga-dveṣau vyudasya cha [51]
vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥdhyāna-yoga-paro nityaṁ vairāgyaṁ samupāśritaḥ [52]
ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigrahamvimuchya nirmamaḥ śānto brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [53]
yuktaḥ (san)–A person possessing; viśuddhayā buddhyā–intelligence of the nature of goodness; niyamya cha–and controlling; ātmānam–the mind; dhṛtyā–through determination of the nature of goodness; tyaktvā–rejecting; viṣayān–the sense objects; śabdādīn–of sound, touch, etc.; vyudasya cha–abandoning; rāga-dveṣau–attachment and aversion—likes and dislikes; vivikta-sevī–remaining free from the association of materialistic persons; laghu-āśī–a temperate eater; yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ–disciplining the body, mind, and speech; nityam–and constantly; dhyāna-yoga-paraḥ–absorbed in meditation on the Supreme Lord; vairāgyam samupāśritah–fully detached from the mundane; vimuchya–giving up; ahaṅkāram–ego—considering oneself ‘the doer’; balam–power; darpam–vanity; kāmam–desire; krodham–anger; parigraham–possessiveness; śāntaḥ–being at peace; nirmamaḥ–not thinking of anything as ‘mine’; kalpate–is qualified; brahma-bhūyāya–for spiritual realisation. [51–53].
51–53 Endowed with intelligence of the nature of goodness, mentally controlled through determination of the nature of goodness, rejecting the sense objects of sound, touch, form, taste, and smell, abandoning attachment and aversion, free from the association of materialistic persons, a temperate eater, disciplining the body, mind, and speech, constantly absorbed in thought of the Supreme Lord, and fully detached from the mundane world; giving up ego, power, vanity, desire, anger, and possessiveness, not thinking of anything as ‘mine’; being at peace—such a person is qualified for spiritual realisation.
ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा न शोचति न काङ्क्षति ।समः सर्व्वेषु भूतेषु मद्भक्तिं लभते पराम् ॥५४॥
brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śochati na kāṅkṣatisamaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [54]
prasanna-ātmā–The joyful, enlightened soul; brahma-bhūtaḥ–who has attained his divine nature; na śochati–neither sorrows; na kāṅkṣati–nor desires. samaḥ–Being of equal vision; sarveṣu–for all; bhūteṣu–living beings (considering My superior potency to be in everything); labhate–he attains; parām–transcendental; mat-bhaktim–devotion to Me. [54]
54 The joyful-hearted, enlightened soul who has attained his divine nature neither sorrows nor desires. Seeing all beings equally, he comes to attain transcendental loving devotion to Me.
भक्त्या मामभिजानाति यावान्यश्चास्मि तत्त्वतः ।ततो मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा विशते तदनन्तरम् ॥५५॥
bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś chāsmi tattvataḥtato māṁ tattvato jñātvā viśate tad-anantaram [55]
bhaktyā–Through devotion; (saḥ)–he; abhijānāti–can well know; mām–Me; tattvataḥ–in reality; yāvān–as far as being the Master of all opulences; yaḥ cha (aham) asmi–and that which I am. jñātvā–Thus knowing Me; tattvataḥ–in truth; (saḥ)–he; tat-anantaram–thereafter; tataḥ–by the potency of that devotion; viśate–enters; mām–My eternal Pastimes (nitya-līlā), non-different from Me. [55]
55 Through devotion, he realises that I am the Lord of all potencies and the Sweet Absolute. Then, realising his divine relationship with Me, he enters the company of My intimate associates who are non-different from My very self.
सर्व्वकर्म्माण्यपि सदा कुर्व्वाणो मद्व्यपाश्रयः ।मत्प्रसादादवाप्नोति शाश्वतं पदमव्ययम् ॥५६॥
sarva-karmāṇy api sadā kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥmat-prasādād avāpnoti śāśvataṁ padam avyayam [56]
api–Although; sadā–ever; kurvāṇaḥ–active; sarva-karmāṇi–in all duties; mat-vyapāśrayaḥ–My surrendered souls; avāpnoti–attain; śāśvataṁ–the eternal; avyayam–immutable (flourishing); padam–plane (of service); mat-prasādāt–by My grace. [56]
56 Although ever active in all duties, those who have taken refuge in Me attain, by My grace, the eternal, indestructable plane (of service).
चेतसा सर्व्वकर्म्माणि मयि सन्न्यस्य मत्परः ।बुद्धियोगमुपाश्रित्य मच्चित्तः सततं भव ॥५७॥
chetasā sarva-karmāṇi mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥbuddhi-yogam upāśritya mach-chittaḥ satataṁ bhava [57]
sannyasya–Offering; chetasā–whole-heartedly; sarva-karmāṇi–all actions; mayi–to Me; mat-paraḥ–keeping Me as the supreme objective; upāśritya–and taking refuge; buddhi-yogam–in dedicating your intelligence to Me; bhava–be; satatam–ever; mat-chittaḥ–devoted to Me. [57]
57 Whole-heartedly offering your every action to Me, keeping Me as the supreme objective and fully dedicating your intelligence to Me (being unattached to worldly action), be ever devoted to Me.
मच्चित्तः सर्व्वदुर्गाणि मत्प्रसादात्तरिष्यसि ।अथ चेत्त्वमहङ्कारान्न श्रोष्यसि विनङ्क्ष्यसि ॥५८॥
mach-chittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi mat-prasādāt tariṣyasiatha chet tvam ahaṅkārān na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi [58]
mach-chittaḥ–Giving your heart to Me; tvam–you; tariṣyasi–will cross; sarva-durgāṇi–all obstacles; mat-prasādāt–by My grace. atha chet–Yet, if; ahaṅkārāt–out of pride; na śroṣyasi–you do not heed (My words); (tarhi)–then; vinaṅkṣyasi–you will perish. [58]
58 Giving your heart to Me, you will be able to overcome all obstacles by My grace. But if out of pride you do not heed My words, you will perish.
यदहङ्कारमाश्रित्य न योत्स्य इति मन्यसे ।मिथ्यैव व्यवसायस्ते प्रकृतिस्त्वां नियोक्ष्यति ॥५९॥
yad ahaṅkāram āśritya na yotsya iti manyasemithyaiva vyavasāyas te prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati [59]
āśritya–Resorting to; ahaṅkāram–pride; yat manyase iti–you are thinking; na yotsya–“I shall not fight”; (eṣaḥ)–but such; vyavasāyaḥ–a decision; te–of yours; (bhaviṣyati)–will be; mithyā eva–only in vain. prakṛtiḥ–The nature befitting a kṣatriya; niyokṣyati–will compel; tvām–you. [59]
59 Out of pride you are thinking, “I shall not fight.” But your decision will be in vain, for your nature (as a kṣatriya) will compel you to fight.
स्वभावजेन कौन्तेय निबद्धः स्वेन कर्म्मणा ।कर्त्तुं नेच्छसि यन्मोहात्करिष्यस्यवशोऽपि तत् ॥६०॥
svabhāva-jena kaunteya nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇākartuṁ nechchhasi yan mohāt kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat [60]
(he) kaunteya–O son of Kuntī; nibaddhaḥ (san)–being bound; svena–by your; karmaṇā–duty; svabhāva-jena–born of your nature; tat api–that very action; yat–which; mohāt–out of delusion; (tvam)–you; na ichchhasi–do not wish; kartum–to perform; kariṣyasi–you will do; avaśaḥ (san)–inevitably. [60]
60 O Kaunteya, being bound by the duty born of your nature, that very action which out of delusion you are now avoiding will be inevitably executed by you.
ईश्वरः सर्व्वभूतानां हृद्देशेऽर्ज्जुन तिष्ठति ।भ्रामयन्सर्व्वभूतानि यन्त्रारूढानि मायया ॥६१॥
īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhatibhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni yantrārūḍhāni māyayā [61]
(he) arjuna–O Arjuna; sarva-bhūtānām–for all beings; īśvaraḥ–the Supreme Lord as the Supersoul; tiṣṭhati–is situated; hṛd-deśe–in region of the heart. māyayā–By His illusory potency; sarva-bhūtāni bhrāmayan–He causes all beings to revolve (through many existences); yantra-ārūḍhāni (iva)–as though riding a carousel. [61]
61 O Arjuna, the Supreme Lord is situated in the hearts of all beings, and by His deluding potency He causes them to revolve (through many existences) like puppets riding a carousel.
तमेव शरणं गच्छ सर्व्वभावेन भारत ।तत्प्रसादात्परां शान्तिं स्थानं प्राप्स्यसि शाश्वतम् ॥६२॥
tam eva śaraṇaṁ gachchha sarva-bhāvena bhāratatat prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam [62]
(he) bhārata–O Bhārat; (ataḥ)–therefore; saraṇam gachchha–surrender; sarva-bhāvena–wholeheartedly; tam eva–unto Him, alone. tat-prasādāt–By His grace; prāpsyasi–you will attain; parām–the supreme; śāntim–peace; śāśvatam–the eternal; sthānam–abode. [62]
62 O Bhārat, wholeheartedly surrender to Him. By His grace you will attain the supreme peace and the eternal abode.
इति ते ज्ञानमाख्यातं गुह्याद्गुह्यतरं मया ।विमृश्यैतदशेषेण यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु ॥६३॥
iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ guhyād guhyataraṁ mayāvimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa yathechchhasi tathā kuru [63]
iti–Up to this point; guhyāt–from profound; guhyataram jñānam–to more profound knowledge; ākhyātam–has been disclosed; mayā–by Me; te–to you. aśeṣeṇa–Fully; vimṛśya–considering; etat–that; kuru–do; yathā–as; ichchhasi–you wish; tathā– accordingly. [63]
63 I have now revealed more and more profound teachings to you. Duly consider this, and then do as you wish.
सर्व्वगुह्यतमं भूयः शृणु मे परमं वचः ।इष्टोऽसि मे दृढमिति ततो वक्ष्यामि ते हितम् ॥६४॥
sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ śṛṇu me paramaṁ vachaḥiṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti tato vakṣyāmi te hitam [64]
bhūyaḥ–Again; śṛṇu–hear; me–My; paramam–supreme; vachaḥ–teaching. sarva-guhyatamam–most profound of all. (tvam)–You; asi–are; dṛḍham–extremely; iṣṭaḥ–dear; me–to Me; iti tataḥ–so; vakṣyāmi–I am speaking; te–to you; hitam–for your benefit. [64]
64 Now again hear My supreme teaching, the most hidden treasure of all. I tell you this for your benefit as you are most dear to Me.
Commentary
According to Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur (Vidvad-rañjan commentary, 9.1), the wisdom of self-realisation in the second and third chapters of Śrī Gītā are the profound (guhyam) teachings of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The Lord’s descriptions of Himself as the Supreme in the seventh and eighth chapters are more profound (guhyataram), as such knowledge gives birth to devotion. In chapter nine, the most profound (guhyatamam) teachings begin as the Lord describes the symptoms of exclusive devotion (kevalā-bhakti).
Because His devotee Arjuna is very dear to Him, the Lord now repeats His secret teaching for Arjuna’s benefit. This time, however, He reveals His most hidden of all hidden treasures (sarva-guhyatamam), His most affectionate advice: “Arjuna, you are most dear to Me, so I will now divulge the whole truth to you.”
मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु ।मामेवैष्यसि सत्यं ते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि मे ॥६५॥
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskurumām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te pratijāne priyo ’si me [65]
bhava–Be; mat-manāḥ–of mind dedicated to Me; mat-bhaktaḥ–devoted to Me; mat-yājī–be My worshipper; namaskuru–and offer obeisance—offer yourself; mām–to Me; (tarhi)–then; eva–certainly; eṣyasi–you will come; mām–to Me. satyam–Truly; pratijāne–I promise this; te–to you; (yataḥ tvam)–as you; asi–are; priyaḥ–dear; me–to Me. [65]
65 Think of Me always, devote yourself to Me, worship Me, and bow to Me, and surely you will come to Me. I promise you this, because you are dear to Me.
सर्व्वधर्म्मान्परित्यज्य मामेकं शरणं व्रज ।अहं त्वां सर्व्वपापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि मा शुचः ॥६६॥
sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vrajaahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śuchaḥ [66]
parityajya–Totally rejecting; sarva-dharmān–all kinds of religion; śaraṇam vraja–take shelter; mām–of Me; ekam–alone. aham–I; mokṣayiṣyāmi–will liberate; tvām–you; sarva-pāpebhyaḥ–from all kinds of sins. mā śuchaḥ–Do not despair. [66]
66 Give up all kinds of religion and surrender to Me alone. I will liberate you from all sins. Do not despair.
Commentary
Here, the glory of the hidden purpose in the Bhagavad-gītā is sung (Gītā-gūḍhārtha-gauravam): “Give up all engagements and come to Me. You won’t have to repent, Arjuna, because I am everything to you, and you are everything to Me. This is the most hidden of all hidden truths. What more can I say? And you will find this in Vraja.”
There is a literary ornament in Sanskrit called dhvani, echo, by which a word ‘echoes’, suggests, an additional meaning. Here, such a hint is given. Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ ‘vraja’*: “You may ‘go’ to ‘Vraja’, and there you will find the most hidden of all hidden truths (sarva-guhyatamam). The deepest secret of the inner loving heart has been fully revealed there: I am beyond all conceptions of religion, society, friends—everything. My position is above everything, and in the heart of the heart of everything. In the eternal land of Vraja, you will experience the whole conception of beauty. Dismiss all other engagements and prospects, and come to Me alone. Your inner hankering will be fulfilled beyond your expectations. You will find such dignity in Me that you will be beyond reaction and repentance.” This is the deepest meaning of the highest glory.
If one comes to this conception, everything else will be seen as sin (Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi). Everything conceived of as duty or purity in this material world will be seen as sinful, and all conceptions of religiosity will be reduced to the level of sin. In the absolute plane, everything and everyone belongs wholly to Kṛṣṇa, and the slightest deviation from this ideal is no better than committing sin. Mere self-forgetfulness leads to impersonalism and culminates in deep slumber. But self-forgetfulness (sarva-dharmān parityajya) in Kṛṣṇa’s service (Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja) is positive and living. It is the full, absolute plane of life.
The hidden treasure attracts our hearts. We have been deprived of our heart’s deepest interest. Though we have a natural claim to it, it has been hidden from us (śrutibhir vimṛgyām). In an unparalleled way, Śrī Gītā considers all these aspects and directs us to the correct meaning and conclusion of all the Upaniṣads. From this point, the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam begins.
*In the verse, vraja means ‘go’, and Vraja is also a name of Vṛndāvan.
इदं ते नातपस्काय नाभक्ताय कदाचन ।न चाशुश्रूषवे वाच्यं न च मां योऽभ्यसूयति ॥६७॥
idaṁ te nātapaskāya nābhaktāya kadāchanana chāśuśrūṣave vāchyaṁ na cha māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati [67]
te–You; kadāchana na vāchyam–should never disclose; idam–this; atapaskāya–to one devoid of self-sacrifice; na abhaktāya–nor to a non-devotee; aśuśrūṣave na cha–nor to one who is averse to My service; yaḥ na cha–nor to one who; abhyasūyati–is resentful; mām–towards Me. [67]
67 You should never disclose this hidden treasure to one devoid of self-sacrifice, to the non-devotee, to the faithless, to one who is averse to My service, or to one who is resentful towards Me.
य इमं परमं गुह्यं मद्भक्तेष्वभिधास्यति ।भक्तिं मयि परां कृत्वा मामेवैष्यत्यसंशयः ॥६८॥
ya imaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyatibhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ [68]
yaḥ–One who; abhidhāsyati–sings the glories of; imam–this; paramam–supreme; guhyam–secret; mat-bhakteṣu–to My devotees; (saḥ)–such a person; kṛtvā–attaining; parām–transcendental; bhaktim–devotion; mayi–to Me; eṣyati–will reach; mām eva–Me; asaṁśayaḥ–without a doubt. [68]
68 One who reveals the glories of this supreme secret to My devotees will attain transcendental devotion to Me and reach Me without a doubt.
न च तस्मान्मनुष्येषु कश्चिन्मे प्रियकृत्तमः ।भविता न च मे तस्मादन्यः प्रियतरो भुवि ॥६९॥
na cha tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaśchin me priya-kṛttamaḥbhavitā na cha me tasmād anyaḥ priyataro bhuvi [69]
manuṣyeṣu–In human society; na cha kaśchit–no one; me priya-kṛttamaḥ–pleases Me more by his actions; tasmāt–than he (the preacher of Bhagavad-gītā); cha–and; na bhavitā–there will not be; anyaḥ–any other; priyataraḥ–dearer; me–to Me; tasmāt– than he; bhuvi–in the world. [69]
69 In the entire human society there is no one who pleases Me by his actions more than he (who preaches the glories of the Bhagavad-gītā), nor will there ever be anyone in the world dearer to Me than he.
अध्येष्यते च य इमं धर्म्म्यं संवादमावयोः ।ज्ञानयज्ञेन तेनाहमिष्टः स्यामिति मे मतिः ॥७०॥
adhyeṣyate cha ya imaṁ dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥjñāna-yajñena tenāham iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ [70]
yaḥ cha–And for he who; adhyeṣyate–studies; imam–this; dharmyam–holy; saṁvādam–conversation; āvayoḥ–of ours; aham–I; syām–shall be; iṣṭaḥ–worshipped; tena–by that (by him); jñāna-yajñena–by the ‘knowledge-sacrifice’. iti–That; me matiḥ–is My opinion. [70]
70 And one who studies with devotion this holy conversation of ours will worship Me by the ‘knowledge-sacrifice’. This is My conclusion.
श्रद्धावाननसूयश्च शृणुयादपि यो नरः ।सोऽपि मुक्तः शुभाँल्लोकान्प्राप्नुयात्पुण्यकर्म्मणाम् ॥७१॥
śraddhāvān anasūyaś cha śṛṇuyād api yo naraḥso ’pi muktaḥ śubhā̐l lokān prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām [71]
saḥ naraḥ api–That person, too; śraddhāvān–possessing faith; anasūyaḥ cha–and without resentment; yaḥ–who; śṛṇuyāt api–only hears; muktaḥ (san)–shall be liberated; (pāpāt)–from sin; prāpnuyāt–and will reach; śubhān–the auspicious; lokān–abodes; (prāpya)–attainable; puṇya-karmaṇām–by the performers of virtuous acts. [71]
71 Simply by hearing this with an open heart, a faithful person is liberated and attains to the auspicious abodes of the virtuous souls.
कच्चिदेतच्छ्रुतं पार्थ त्वयैकाग्रेण चेतसा ।कच्चिदज्ञानसम्मोहः प्रणष्टस्ते धनञ्जय ॥७२॥
kachchid etach chhrutaṁ pārtha tvayaikāgreṇa chetasākachchid ajñāna-sammohaḥ praṇaṣṭas te dhanañjaya [72]
(he) pārtha–O son of Kuntī; kachchit–has; etat–this Gītā; śrutam–been heard; tvayā–by you; ekāgrena–with your single-minded; chetasā–attention? (he) dhanañjaya–O Arjuna; kachchit te–has your; ajñāna-sammohaḥ–ignorance and delusion; praṇaṣṭaḥ–been dispelled? [72]
72 O Pārtha, have you listened to this with your undivided attention? O Dhanañjaya, are you now free from the darkness of your delusion?
अर्ज्जुन उवाच ।
नष्टो मोहः स्मृतिर्लब्धा त्वत्प्रसादान्मयाच्युत ।स्थितोऽस्मि गतसन्देहः करिष्ये वचनं तव ॥७३॥
arjuna uvācha
naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā tvat prasādān mayāchyutasthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ kariṣye vachanaṁ tava [73]
arjunaḥ uvācha–Arjuna said: (he) achyuta–O Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tvat prasādāt–by Your grace; (me)–my; mohaḥ–delusion; naṣṭaḥ–is dispelled. smṛtiḥ–Self-remembrance; labdhā–is regained; mayā–by me. sthitaḥ asmi–I am steady. gata-sandehaḥ–My doubts have gone. kariṣye–I shall follow; tava–Your; vachanam–instructions. [73]
73 Arjuna said: O infallible one, by Your grace my delusion is now gone, I can now remember who I am, my doubts are destroyed, and I am firm in my resolve. I shall follow Your instructions.
सञ्जय उवाच ।
इत्यहं वासुदेवस्य पार्थस्य च महात्मनः ।संवादमिममश्रौषमद्भुतं रोमहर्षणम् ॥७४॥
sañjaya uvācha
ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya pārthasya cha mahātmanaḥsaṁvādam imam aśrauṣam adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam [74]
sañjayaḥ uvācha–Sañjaya said: iti–thus; aham–I; aśrauṣam–heard; imam–this; adbhutam–wonderful; roma-harṣaṇam–thrilling; saṁvādam–conversation; mahā-ātmanaḥ vāsudevasya–of the Supreme Soul Vāsudeva; pārthasya cha–and Arjuna. [74]
74 Sañjaya said: Thus, I heard this wondrous conversation of the Supreme Soul Vāsudev and the son of Pṛthā, Arjuna, which arouses ecstasy in the hearts of all.
व्यासप्रसादाच्छ्रुतवानिमं गुह्यमहं परम् ।योगं योगेश्वरात्कृष्णात्साक्षात्कथयतः स्वयम् ॥७५॥
vyāsa-prasādāch chhrutavān imaṁ guhyam ahaṁ paramyogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt sākṣāt-kathayataḥ svayam [75]
vyāsa-prasādāt–By the grace of Śrī Vyāsadev; aham–I; śrutavān–heard; imam–this; param–supreme; guhyam–secret; yogam–yoga (yoga of action, knowledge, and devotion); sākṣāt-kathayataḥ–spoken directly; yogeśvarāt–by the Lord of yoga; kṛṣṇāt svayam–Kṛṣṇa Himself. [75]
75 By the mercy of Śrī Vyāsadev I heard this supreme secret teaching of yoga, sung directly by the Supreme Lord of yoga, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.
राजन्संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य संवादमिममद्भुतम् ।केशवार्ज्जुनयोः पुण्यं हृष्यामि च मुहुर्मुहुः ॥७६॥
rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya saṁvādam imam adbhutamkeśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ hṛṣyāmi cha muhur muhuḥ [76]
(he) rājan–O King Dhṛtarāṣṭra; saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya–ever remembering; imam adbhutam–this miraculous; puṇyam–sacred; saṁvādam–conversation; keśava-arjuna-yoḥ–of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna; hṛṣyāmi–my heart thrills; muhuḥ muhuḥ cha–repeatedly. [76]
76 O King, ever remembering this miraculous, sacred conversation of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, my heart thrills over and over again.
तच्च संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य रूपमत्यद्भुतं हरेः ।विस्मयो मे महान्राजन्हृष्यामि च पुनः पुनः ॥७७॥
tach cha saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya rūpam atyadbhutaṁ hareḥvismayo me mahān rājan hṛṣyāmi cha punaḥ punaḥ [77]
(he) rājan–O King; saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya cha–and repeatedly remembering; tat–that; ati-adbhutam–most miraculous; rūpam–universal form; hareḥ–of the Lord, Śrī Hari; me–my; mahān–great; vismayaḥ–wonder; (bhavati)–occurs; cha–and; hṛṣyāmi–and I thrill with ecstasy; punaḥ punaḥ–again and again. [77]
77 And remembering, O King, I marvel at that astonishing, almighty universal form of the Supreme Lord Hari, and my whole being thrills with ecstasy.
यत्र योगेश्वरः कृष्णो यत्र पार्थो धनुर्धरः ।तत्र श्रीर्विजयो भूतिर्ध्रुवा नीतिर्मतिर्मम ॥७८॥
yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥtatra śrīr vijayo bhūtir dhruvā nītir matir mama [78]
yatra–Where there is; yoga-īśvaraḥ–the Lord of yoga, the objective of yoga; kṛṣṇaḥ–Lord Kṛṣṇa; yatra–where there is; dhanuḥ-dharaḥ pārthaḥ–Arjuna with bow in hand, the winner of wealth; tatra–there; dhruvā–prevails; śrīḥ–fortune; vijayaḥ–victory, Jayaśrī; bhūtiḥ–prosperity; nītiḥ–and virtue. (iti)–This is; mama–my; matiḥ–opinion. [78]
78 Where there is Yogeśvar Kṛṣṇa, and where there is Arjuna, the winner of wealth with bow in hand, there prevails fortune, victory, prosperity, and virtue. This is my opinion.
इति श्रीमहाभारते शतसाहस्र्यां संहितायां वैयासिक्या भीष्मपर्व्वणिश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रेश्रीकृष्णार्ज्जुनसंवादे मोक्षयोगो नामष्टादशोऽध्यायः ॥१८॥
iti śrī-mahābhārate śata-sāhasryāṁ saṁhitāyāṁ vaiyāsikyāṁbhīṣma-parvaṇi śrīmad-bhagavad-gītāsūpaniṣatsu brahmavidyāyāṁ yoga-śāstre śrī-kṛṣṇārjuna-saṁvāde mokṣayogo nāmaṣṭādaśo ’dhyāyaḥ [18]
End of Chapter EighteenThe Path of Liberationfrom the conversationof Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjunain Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Upaniṣad,the yoga scripture of transcendental knowledgein Bhīṣma Parva of Śrī Mahābhārata, the holy scripturerevealed by Śrīla Vyāsadev in a hundred thousand verses.
श्रीगीतामाहात्म्यम् ।
The Glories of the Gītā
गीताशास्त्रमिदं पुण्यं यः पठेत्प्रयतः पुमान् ।विष्णोः पदमवाप्नोति भयशोकादिवर्ज्जितः ॥१॥
gītā-śāstram idaṁ puṇyaṁ yaḥ paṭhet prayataḥ pumānviṣṇoḥ padam avāpnoti bhaya-śokādi-varjitaḥ [1]
1 This Bhagavad-gītā scripture is the bestower of all good. One who regularly studies it with devotion will attain to the holy abode of Lord Viṣṇu, the plane of freedom from all distress, fear, and sorrow.
गीताध्ययनशीलस्य प्राणायामपरस्य च ।नैव सन्ति हि पापानि पूर्व्वजन्मकृतानि च ॥२॥
gītādhyayana-śīlasya prāṇāyāma-parasya chanaiva santi hi pāpāni pūrva-janma-kṛtāni cha [2]
2 For a self-controlled person who seriously studies this Bhagavad-gītā scripture, not a trace of sin from this life or even from the previous life remains, as all the sins of such a person are burnt to ashes.
मलनिर्मोचनं पुंसां जलस्नानं दिने दिने ।सकृद्गीताम्भसि स्नानं संसारमलनाशनम् ॥३॥
malanir mochanaṁ puṁsāṁ jala-snānaṁ dine dinesakṛd-gītāmbhasi snānaṁ saṁsāra-mala-nāśanam [3]
3 As a person bathes every day to cleanse the body, similarly, by bathing only once in the waters of the Bhagavad-gītā (reading the Gītā once with devotion) all the dirt of painful material existence is washed away.
गीता सुगीता कर्त्तव्या किमन्यैः शास्त्रविस्तरैः ।या स्वयं पद्मनाभस्य मुखपद्माद्विनिःसृता ॥४॥
gītā sugītā kartavyā kim anyaiḥ śāstra-vistaraiḥyā svayaṁ padma-nābhasya mukha-padmād viniḥsṛtā [4]
4 The Gītā should always be sung with devotion. This divine song emanated from the holy lotus mouth of the Supreme Lord Himself, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. What more can any other scriptures give?
भारतामृतसर्व्वस्वं विष्णोर्वक्त्राद्विनिःसृतम् ।गीतागङ्गोदकं पीत्वा पुनर्जन्म न विद्यते ॥५॥
bhāratāmṛta-sarvasvaṁ viṣṇor vaktrād viniḥsṛtamgītā-gaṅgodakaṁ pītvā punar janma na vidyate [5]
5 By drinking the Ganges waters of the Gītā (by singing the Gītā with devotion), the nectar of the Mahābhārata emanating from the lotus mouth of Lord Viṣṇu, one will never take birth in the material world again.
सर्व्वोपनिषदो गावो दोग्धा गोपालनन्दनः ।पार्थो वत्सः सुधीर्भोक्ता दुग्धं गीतामृतं महत् ॥६॥
sarvopaniṣado gāvo dogdhā gopāla-nandanaḥpārtho vatsaḥ sudhīr bhoktā dugdhaṁ gītāmṛtaṁ mahat [6]
6 All the Upaniṣads are as the cow, and the milker of the cow is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda. Arjuna is the calf, the nectar of the Gītā is the milk, and the fortunate devotees are the enjoyers of the milk.
एकं शास्त्रं देवकीपुत्रगीतम्एको देवो देवकीपुत्र एव ।एको मन्त्रस्तस्य नामानि यानिकर्म्माप्येकं तस्य देवस्य सेवा ॥७॥
ekaṁ śāstraṁ devakī-putra-gītameko devo devakī-putra evaeko mantras tasya nāmāni yānikarmāpy ekaṁ tasya devasya sevā [7]
7 There need be only one scripture—the holy Gītā sung by Śrī Kṛṣṇa; only one worshippable Lord—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; only one mantra—His Holy Names; and only one work—devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
श्रीवैष्णवीय तन्त्रसारोक्तश्रीमद्भगवद्गीतामाहात्म्यम्
The Glories of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā from Śrī-Vaiṣṇavīya-tantra-sāra
ऋषिरुवाच ।
गीतायाश्चैव माहात्म्यं यथावत्सूत मे वद ।पुरा नारायणक्षेत्रे व्यासेन मुनिनोदितम् ॥१॥
ṛṣir uvācha
gītāyāś chaiva māhātmyaṁ yathāvat sūta me vadapurā nārāyaṇa-kṣetre vyāsena muninoditam [1]
1 The sage said: O Sūta, please tell us of the glories of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, as expressed long ago at Nārāyaṇ Kṣetra by the great sage Śrīla Vyāsadev.
सूत उवाच ।
भद्रं भगवता पृष्टं यद्धि गुप्ततमं परम् ।शक्यते केन तद्वक्तुं गीतामाहात्म्यमुत्तमम् ॥२॥
sūta uvācha
bhadraṁ bhagavatā pṛṣṭaṁ yaddhi guptatamaṁ paramśakyate kena tad vaktuṁ gītā-māhātmyam uttamam [2]
2 Sūta Goswāmī said: O venerable one, your request is most auspicious. Indeed, who can describe the transcendental glories of Śrī Gītā, the most hidden of all treasures?
कृष्णो जानाति वै सम्यक्कञ्चित्कुन्तीसुतः फलम् ।व्यासो वा व्यासपुत्रो वा याज्ञवल्क्योऽथ मैथिलः ॥३॥
kṛṣṇo jānāti vai samyak kiñchit kuntī-sutaḥ phalamvyāso vā vyāsa-putro vā yājñavalkyo ’tha maithilaḥ [3]
3 Certainly Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is in full knowledge of those glories; and so Arjuna, the son of Kuntī, knows of them; and Vyāsadev, Śukadev, Yājñavalkya, and the saintly King Janaka, too.
अन्ये श्रवणतः श्रुत्वा लेशं सङ्कीर्त्तयन्ति च ।तस्मात्किञ्चिद्वदाम्यत्र व्यासस्य स्यान्मया श्रुतम् ॥४॥
anye śravaṇataḥ śrutvā leśaṁ saṅkīrtayanti chatasmāt kiñchid vadāmy atra vyāsasya syān mayā śrutam [4]
4 Others too, who have heard but a little of the glories of Śrī Gītā, are engaged in singing them. And so I shall now speak of the glories of Śrī Gītā as I heard them from Vyāsadev:
सर्व्वोपनिषदो गावो दोग्धा गोपालनन्दनः ।पार्थो वत्सः सुधीर्भोक्ता दुग्धं गीतामृतं महत् ॥५॥
sarvopaniṣado gāvo dogdhā gopāla-nandanaḥpārtho vatsaḥ sudhīr bhoktā dugdhaṁ gītāmṛtaṁ mahat [5]
5 All the Upaniṣads are personified as the cow, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is milker of the cow, Arjuna is the calf, the nectar of the Gītā is the milk, and the fortunate devotees are the enjoyers of the milk.
सारथ्यमर्ज्जुनस्यादौ कुर्व्वन्गीतामृतं ददौ ।लोकत्रयोपकाराय तस्मै कृष्णात्मने नमः ॥६॥
sārathyam arjunasyādau kurvan gītāmṛtaṁ dadauloka-trayopakārāya tasmai kṛṣṇātmane namaḥ [6]
6 I first offer my obeisances unto Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa who accepted the position of the chariot driver of Arjuna, just to distribute this nectar of the Gītā for the benefit of the three worlds.
संसारसागरं घोरं तर्त्तुमिच्छति यो नरः ।गीतानावं समासाद्य पारं याति सुखेन सः ॥७॥
saṁsāra-sāgaraṁ ghoraṁ tartum ichchhati yo naraḥgītā-nāvaṁ samāsādya pāraṁ yāti sukhena saḥ [7]
7 A person desiring to cross over the treacherous ocean of material suffering can do so very easily by taking refuge in the boat of the Bhagavad-gītā.
गीताज्ञानं श्रुतं नैव सदैवाभ्यासयोगतः ।मोक्षमिच्छति मूढात्मा याति बालकहास्यताम् ॥८॥
gītā-jñānaṁ śrutaṁ naiva sadaivābhyāsa-yogataḥmokṣam ichchhati mūḍhātmā yāti bālaka-hāsyatām [8]
8 A foolish person who desires liberation by constant yoga practice without hearing the wisdom of the Gītā, is to be considered childish.
ये शृण्वन्ति पठन्त्येव गीताशास्त्रमहर्निशम् ।न ते वै मानुषा ज्ञेया देवरूपा न संशयः ॥९॥
ye śṛṇvanti paṭhanty eva gītā-śāstram ahar niśamna te vai mānuṣā jñeyā deva-rūpā na saṁśayaḥ [9]
9 Persons who day and night hear and sing the Gītā are never to be taken as mere human beings. Without doubt, they are as gods in this world.
गीताज्ञानेन सम्बोधं कृष्णः प्राहार्ज्जुनाय वै ।भक्तितत्त्वं परं तत्र सगुणं वाथ निर्गुणम् ॥१०॥
gītā-jñānena sambodhaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ prāhārjunāya vaibhakti-tattvaṁ paraṁ tatra sa-guṇaṁ vātha nirguṇam [10]
10 To enlighten Arjuna with the wisdom of the Gītā, Lord Kṛṣṇachandra has revealed the supremacy of devotion, either in this world or in the transcendental plane.
सोपानाष्टादशैरेवं भुक्तिमुक्तिसमुच्छ्रितैः ।क्रमशश्चित्तशुद्धिः स्यात्प्रेमभक्त्यादिकर्म्मसु ॥११॥
sopānāṣṭādaśair evaṁ bhukti-mukti-samuchchhritaiḥkramaśaś chitta-śuddhiḥ syāt prema-bhakty ādi karmasu [11]
11 Thus, the wisdom of the Gītā is a ladder of eighteen chapters, ascending which one rises above sense enjoyment and liberation (bhukti-mukti), and gradually attains purification of the heart and the qualification of loving devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
साधोर्गीताम्भसि स्नानं संसारमलनाशनम् ।श्रद्धाहीनस्य तत्कार्य्यं हस्तिस्नानं वृथैव तत् ॥१२॥
sādhor gītāmbhasi snānaṁ saṁsāra-mala-nāśanamśraddhā-hīnasya tat kāryaṁ hasti-snānaṁ vṛthaiva tat [12]
12 Bathing in the pure waters of the Gītā, the devotees are liberated from the contamination of the mundane world. However, persons lacking faith in the Lord may attempt this, but in vain, like an elephant’s bathing. (The elephant immediately rolls in the dust after bathing).
गीतायाश्च न जानाति पठनं नैव पाठनम् ।स एव मानुषे लोके मोघकर्म्मकरो भवेत् ॥१३॥
gītāyāś cha na jānāti paṭhanaṁ naiva pāṭhanamsa eva mānuṣe loke mogha-karma-karo bhavet [13]
13 A person who knows nothing of learning and teaching the Gītā fails in the duty of the human being.
तस्माद्गीतां न जानाति नाधमस्तत्परो जनः ।धिक्तस्य मानुषं देहं विज्ञानं कुलशीलताम् ॥१४॥
tasmād gītāṁ na jānāti nādhamas tat paro janaḥdhik tasya mānuṣaṁ dehaṁ vijñānaṁ kula-śīlatām [14]
14 Therefore, there is none more fallen than he who is ignorant of the teachings of the Gītā. Shame on his human birth, his learning, his dignity, and his entire family.
गीतार्थं न विजानाति नाधमस्तत्परो जनः ।धिक्शरीरं शुभं शीलं विभवन्तद्गृहाश्रमम् ॥१५॥
gītārthaṁ na vijānāti nādhamas tat paro janaḥdhik śarīraṁ śubhaṁ śīlaṁ vibhavantad gṛhāśramam [15]
15 There is none more fallen than he who is ignorant of the meaning of the Gītā. Shame on his bodily beauty, his character, his wealth, and his home.
गीताशास्त्रं न जानाति नाधमस्तत्परो जनः ।धिक्प्रारब्धं प्रतिष्ठाञ्च पूजां दानं महत्तमम् ॥१६॥
gītā-śāstraṁ na jānāti nādhamas tat paro janaḥdhik prārabdhaṁ pratiṣṭhāñ cha pūjāṁ dānaṁ mahattamam [16]
16 There is none more fallen than he who is ignorant of the scripture Bhagavad-gītā. Shame on his undertakings, his reputation, his worship, his charity, and his honour.
गीताशास्त्रे मतिर्नास्ति सर्व्वं तन्निष्फलं जगुः ।धिक्तस्य ज्ञानदातारं व्रतं निष्ठां तपो यशः ॥१७॥
gītā-śāstre matir nāsti sarvaṁ tan niṣphalaṁ jaguḥdhik tasya jñāna-dātāraṁ vrataṁ niṣṭhāṁ tapo yaśaḥ [17]
17 A person who does not care for the Gītā scripture is to be known as a failure in all respects. Shame on his teacher, his vows, his faith, his austerity, and his renown.
गीतार्थपठनं नास्ति नाधमस्तत्परो जनः ।गीतागीतं न यज्ज्ञानं तद्विद्ध्यासुरसम्मतम् ।तन्मोघं धर्म्मरहितं वेदवेदान्तगर्हितम् ॥१८॥
gītārtha-paṭhanaṁ nāsti nādhamas tat paro janaḥgītā-gītaṁ na yaj jñānaṁ tad viddhy āsura-sammatamtan moghaṁ dharma-rahitaṁ veda-vedānta-garhitam [18]
18 There is none more fallen than he who does not study the purport of the Gītā; and that knowledge which is not glorified in the Gītā should be known as demoniac, futile, unvirtuous, and rejected by the Vedas and the Upaniṣads.
तस्माद्धर्म्ममयी गीता सर्व्वज्ञानप्रयोजिका ।सर्व्वशास्त्रसारभूता विशुद्धा सा विशिष्यते ॥१९॥
tasmād dharma-mayī gītā sarva-jñāna-prayojikāsarva-śāstra-sāra-bhūtā viśuddhā sā viśiṣyate [19]
19 Therefore, the holy Gītā is universally respected as the compilation of the essence of all scriptures and the source of all wisdom.
योऽधीते विष्णुपर्व्वाहे गीतां श्रीहरिवासरे ।स्वपन्जाग्रत्चलन्तिष्ठन्शत्रुभिर्न स हीयते ॥२०॥
yo ’dhīte viṣṇu-parvāhe gītāṁ śrī-hari-vāsaresvapan jāgrat chalan tiṣṭhan śatrubhir na sa hīyate [20]
20 One who studies the Gītā on the holy festival days of the advent of the Supreme Lord, and on the holy fasting days, especially Ekādaśī—such a person, whether awake or asleep, moving or still, is never defeated by enemies.
शालग्रामशिलायां वा देवागारे शिवालये ।तीर्थे नद्यां पठेद्गीतां सौभाग्यं लभते ध्रुवम् ॥२१॥
śālagrāma-śilāyāṁ vā devāgāre śivālayetīrthe nadyāṁ paṭhed gītāṁ saubhāgyaṁ labhate dhruvam [21]
21 One who sings the Gītā before the Śālagrām-śilā Deity, or in a Temple of the Supreme Lord, or in a Temple of Lord Śiva, at a holy place of pilgrimage, or on the bank of a holy river—certainly such a person attains to all good fortune.
देवकीनन्दनः कृष्णो गीतापाठेन तुष्यति ।यथा न वेदैर्दानेन यज्ञतीर्थव्रतादिभिः ॥२२॥
devakī-nandanaḥ kṛṣṇo gītā-pāṭhena tuṣyatiyathā na vedair dānena yajña-tīrtha-vratādibhiḥ [22]
22 Neither the singing of the Vedas, nor the performance of charity, sacrifice, pilgrimage, or vows, can bring such satisfaction to Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, as does the singing of the Gītā.
गीताधीता च येनापि भक्तिभावेन चेतसा ।वेदशास्त्रपुराणानि तेनाधीतानि सर्व्वशः ॥२३॥
gītādhītā cha yenāpi bhakti-bhāvena chetasāveda-śāstra-purāṇāni tenādhītāni sarvaśaḥ [23]
23 The study of the Vedas and Purāṇas, verily the study of all the scriptures, is fulfilled in all respects by one who studies the Gītā with devotion.
योगस्थाने सिद्धपीठे शिलाग्रे सत्सभासु च ।यज्ञे च विष्णुभक्ताग्रे पठन्सिद्धिं परां लभेत् ॥२४॥
yoga-sthāne siddha-pīṭhe śilāgre sat-sabhāsu chayajñe cha viṣṇu-bhaktāgre paṭhan siddhiṁ parāṁ labhet [24]
24 The highest perfection of life is attained by one who sings the Gītā at a place of yoga meditation, at a place of worship, before the Śālagrām-śilā, in the association of saintly persons, during a sacrifice, and before a devotee of Viṣṇu.
गीतापाठञ्च श्रवणं यः करोति दिने दिने ।क्रतवो वाजिमेधाद्याः कृतास्तेन सदक्षिणाः ॥२५॥
gītā-pāṭhañ cha śravaṇaṁ yaḥ karoti dine dinekratavo vājimedhādyāḥ kṛtās tena sa-dakṣiṇāḥ [25]
25 One who daily hears and sings the Gītā is to be considered as having accomplished the performance of all sacrifices such as the Aśvamedha and others, including the receiving of the sacrificial gifts.
यः शृणोति च गीतार्थं कीर्त्तयत्येव यः परम् ।श्रावयेच्च परार्थं वै स प्रयाति परं पदम् ॥२६॥
yaḥ śṛṇoti cha gītārthaṁ kīrtayaty eva yaḥ paramśrāvayech cha parārthaṁ vai sa prayāti paraṁ padam [26]
26 One who attentively hears and sings the glories of the purport of the Gītā, or reiterates it to others, attains to the supreme destination.
गीतायाः पुस्तकं शुद्धं योऽर्पयत्येव सादरात् ।विधिना भक्तिभावेन तस्य भार्य्या प्रिया भवेत् ॥२७॥
gītāyāḥ pustakaṁ śuddhaṁ yo ’rpayaty eva sādarātvidhinā bhakti-bhāvena tasya bhāryā priyā bhavet [27]
27 One who, with respect and devotion, and according to scriptural directives makes a gift of this holy book, the Gītā—such a person’s wife will be devoted.
यशः सौभाग्यमारोग्यं लभते नात्र संशयः ।दयितानां प्रियो भूत्वा परमं सुखमश्नुते ॥२८॥
yaśaḥ saubhāgyam ārogyaṁ labhate nātra saṁśayaḥdayitānāṁ priyo bhūtvā paramaṁ sukham aśnute [28]
28 And without a doubt, he shall enjoy fame, fortune, and good health. He shall enjoy the affection of those dear to him, and he shall know the highest happiness.
अभिचारोद्भवं दुःखं वरशापागतञ्च यत् ।नोपसर्पति तत्रैव यत्र गीतार्च्चनं गृहे ॥२९॥
abhichārodbhavaṁ duḥkhaṁ vara-śāpāgatañ cha yatnopasarpati tatraiva yatra gītārchanaṁ gṛhe [29]
29 The sorrow caused by a terrible curse or black rites can never enter the home where the Gītā is worshipped.
तापत्रयोद्भवा पीडा नैव व्याधिर्भवेत्क्वचित् ।न शापो नैव पापञ्च दुर्गतिर्नरकं न च ॥३०॥
tāpa-trayodbhavā pīḍā naiva vyādhir bhavet kvachitna śāpo naiva pāpañ cha durgatir narakaṁ na cha [30]
30 In that house there is never suffering of the threefold miseries, nor fear of any illness, curse, sin, misfortune, or hellish existence.
विस्फोटकादयो देहे न बाधन्ते कदाचन ।लभेत्कृष्णपदे दास्यां भक्तिञ्चाव्यभिचारिणीम् ॥३१॥
visphoṭakādayo dehe na bādhante kadāchanalabhet kṛṣṇa-pade dāsyāṁ bhaktiñ chāvyabhichāriṇīm [31]
31 In that house, no one is ever afflicted with infectious diseases, and the residents attain undeviating devotion in service to the lotus feet of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
जायते सततं सख्यं सर्व्वजीवगणैः सह ।प्रारब्धं भुञ्जतो वापि गीताभ्यासरतस्य च ॥३२॥
jāyate satataṁ sakhyaṁ sarva-jīva-gaṇaiḥ sahaprārabdhaṁ bhuñjato vāpi gītābhyāsa-ratasya cha [32]
32 A person devoted to singing the Gītā acquires a friendly disposition to all living beings, despite the desirable or undesirable reactions of his previous actions.
स मुक्तः स सुखी लोके कर्म्मणा नोपलिप्यते ।महापापातिपापानि गीताध्यायी करोति चेत् ।न किञ्चित्स्पृश्यते तस्य नलिनीदलमम्भसा ॥३३॥
sa muktaḥ sa sukhī loke karmaṇā nopalipyatemahā-pāpāti-pāpāni gītādhyāyī karoti chetna kiñchit spṛśyate tasya nalinī-dalam-ambhasā [33]
33 He is liberated, and he is happy. He is never implicated by his actions. Even if perchance that person who studies the Gītā commits terrible sin, he is as unaffected as the lotus leaf that remains untouched by even a drop of water.
अनाचारोद्भवं पापमवाच्यादिकृतञ्च यत् ।अभक्ष्यभक्षजं दोषमस्पृश्यस्पर्शजं तथा ॥३४॥
ज्ञानाज्ञानकृतं नित्यमिन्द्रियैर्जनितञ्च यत् ।तत्सर्व्वं नाशमायाति गीतापाठेन तत्क्षणात् ॥३५॥
anāchārodbhavaṁ pāpam avāchyādi-kṛtañ cha yatabhakṣya-bhakṣajaṁ doṣam aspṛśya-sparśajaṁ tathā [34]
jñānājñāna-kṛtaṁ nityam indriyair janitañ cha yattat sarvaṁ nāśam āyāti gītā-pāṭhena tat-kṣaṇāt [35]
34–35 Whether the inauspiciousness of wrong action or malevolent speech, of eating unacceptable food or touching the untouchable, or sin knowingly or unknowingly contracted through the senses in the course of daily activities—all evils are immediately dispelled by singing the Gītā with devotion.
सर्व्वत्र प्रतिभोक्ता च प्रतिगृह्य च सर्व्वशः ।गीतापाठं प्रकुर्व्वाणो न लिप्येत कदाचन ॥३६॥
sarvatra pratibhoktā cha pratigṛhya cha sarvaśaḥgītā-pāṭhaṁ prakurvāṇo na lipyeta kadāchana [36]
36 One sincerely devoted to singing the Gītā is never implicated despite accepting food in all places or gifts in all kinds of circumstances.
रत्नपूर्णां महीं सर्व्वां प्रतिगृह्याविधानतः ।गीतापाठेन चैकेन शुद्धस्फटिकवत्सदा ॥३७॥
ratna-pūrṇāṁ mahīṁ sarvāṁ pratigṛhyāvidhānataḥgītā-pāṭhena chaikena śuddha-sphaṭikavat sadā [37]
37 One who takes unlawful possession of the entire earth full of jewels—he, too, will be innocent; by singing the Gītā but once, his heart will be as clear as crystal.
यस्यान्तःकरणं नित्यं गीतायां रमते सदा ।स साग्निकः सदा जापी क्रियावान्स च पण्डितः ॥३८॥
yasyāntaḥkaraṇaṁ nityaṁ gītāyāṁ ramate sadāsa sāgnikaḥ sadā jāpī kriyāvān sa cha paṇḍitaḥ [38]
38 A person whose heart is ever joyfully absorbed in the Gītā is to be considered fully accomplished in sacrifices, always in prayer, perfect in his actions, and truly learned.
दर्शनीयः स धनवान्स योगी ज्ञानवानपि ।स एव याज्ञिको याजी सर्व्ववेदार्थदर्शकः ॥३९॥
darśanīyaḥ sa dhanavān sa yogī jñānavān apisa eva yājñiko yājī sarva-vedārtha-darśakaḥ [39]
39 All are benefitted simply by seeing him. He is glorious, he is a yogī, and he is wise. He is a knower of sacrifice, he is engaged in sacrifice, and he is a knower of the purport of all the Vedas.
गीतायाः पुस्तकं यत्र नित्यपाठश्च वर्त्तते ।तत्र सर्व्वाणि तीर्थानि प्रयागादीनि भूतले ॥४०॥
gītāyāḥ pustakaṁ yatra nitya-pāṭhaś cha vartatetatra sarvāṇi tīrthāni prayāgādīni bhūtale [40]
40 All the holy places in this world, such as Prayāg and others, are present wherever the holy book of the Gītā is present and sung constantly.
निवसन्ति सदा देहे देहशेषेऽपि सर्व्वदा ।सर्व्वे देवाश्च ऋषयो योगिनो देहरक्षकाः ॥४१॥
nivasanti sadā dehe deha-śeṣe ’pi sarvadāsarve devāś cha ṛṣayo yogino deha-rakṣakāḥ [41]
41 For one who constantly studies the Gītā, the demigods, sages, and yogīs all preside as guardians in the body, even at the time of death.
गोपालो बालकृष्णोऽपि नारदध्रुवपार्षदैः ।सहायो जायते शीघ्रं यत्र गीता प्रवर्त्तते ॥४२॥
gopālo bāla-kṛṣṇo ’pi nārada-dhruva-pārṣadaiḥsahāyo jāyate śīghraṁ yatra gītā pravartate [42]
42 Wherever the Gītā is sung, the gracious cowherd boy Śrī Kṛṣṇa swiftly appears as a friend, accompanied by His associates Nārad, Dhruva, and others.
यत्र गीताविचारश्च पठनं पाठनं तथा ।मोदते तत्र श्रीकृष्णो भगवान्राधया सह ॥४३॥
yatra gītā-vichāraś cha paṭhanaṁ pāṭhanaṁ tathāmodate tatra śrī-kṛṣṇo bhagavān rādhayā saha [43]
43 Wherever the Gītā scripture is discussed, studied, and taught, the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa comes with great joy, accompanied by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.
श्रीभगवानुवाच ।
गीता मे हृदयं पार्थ गीता मे सारमुत्तमम् ।गीता मे ज्ञानमत्युग्रं गीता मे ज्ञानमव्ययम् ॥४४॥
śrī-bhagavān uvācha
gītā me hṛdayaṁ pārtha gītā me sāram uttamamgītā me jñānam aty ugraṁ gītā me jñānam avyayam [44]
44 The Supreme Lord said: O Pārtha, the Gītā is My heart, the Gītā is My supreme essence, and the Gītā is the most powerful, imperishable knowledge of Me.
गीता मे चोत्तमं स्थानं गीता मे परमं पदम् ।गीता मे परमं गुह्यं गीता मे परमो गुरुः ॥४५॥
gītā me chottamaṁ sthānaṁ gītā me paramaṁ padamgītā me paramaṁ guhyaṁ gītā me paramo guruḥ [45]
45 The Gītā is My supreme place, the Gītā is My supreme plane, the Gītā is My most hidden treasure, the Gītā is My supreme teacher.
गीताश्रयेऽहं तिष्ठामि गीता मे परमं गृहम् ।गीताज्ञानं समाश्रित्य त्रिलोकीं पालयाम्यहम् ॥४६॥
gītāśraye ’haṁ tiṣṭhāmi gītā me paramaṁ gṛhamgītā-jñānaṁ samāśritya trilokīṁ pālayāmy aham [46]
46 I am present within the Gītā, and the Gītā is My supreme abode. I maintain the three worlds by the eternal wisdom of the Gītā.
गीता मे परमा विद्या ब्रह्मरूपा न संशयः ।अर्धमात्राहरा नित्यमनिर्व्वाच्यपदात्मिका ॥४७॥
gītā me paramā-vidyā brahma-rūpā na saṁśayaḥardha-mātrā-harā nityam anirvāchya-padātmikā [47]
47 The Gītā is My transcendental wisdom, My own self, conveyed by every letter and comprised of eternally ineffable verses.
गीतानामानि वक्ष्यामि गुह्यानि शृणु पाण्डव ।कीर्त्तनात्सर्व्वपापानि विलयं यान्ति तत्क्षणात् ॥४८॥
gītā-nāmāni vakṣyāmi guhyāni śṛṇu pāṇḍavakīrtanāt sarva-pāpāni vilayaṁ yānti tat-kṣaṇāt [48]
48 O Pāṇḍava, I shall tell you the holy names of the Gītā. By singing these names, one is immediately absolved of all sins. Hear now those confidential names from Me:
गङ्गा गीता च सावित्री सीता सत्या पतिव्रता ।ब्रह्मावलिर्ब्रह्मविद्या त्रिसन्ध्या मुक्तगेहिनी ॥४९॥
अर्धमात्रा चिदानन्दा भवघ्नी भ्रान्तिनाशिनी ।वेदत्रयी परानन्दा तत्त्वार्थज्ञानमञ्जरी ॥५०॥
gaṅgā gītā cha sāvitrī sītā satyā pativratābrahmāvalir brahma-vidyā tri-sandhyā mukta-gehinī [49]
ardha-mātrā chidānandā bhava-ghnī bhrānti-nāśinīveda-trayī parānandā tattvārtha-jñāna-mañjarī [50]
49–50 Gaṅgā, Gītā, Sāvitrī, Sītā, Satyā, Pativratā, Brahmāvalī, Brahmavidyā, Trisandhyā, Mukta-gehinī, Ardhamātrā, Chidānandā, Bhavaghnī, Bhrānti-nāśinī, Vedatrayī, Parānandā, and Tattvārtha-jñāna-mañjarī.
इत्येतानि जपेन्नित्यं नरो निश्चलमानसः ।ज्ञानसिद्धिं लभेन्नित्यं तथान्ते परमं पदम् ॥५१॥
ity etāni japen nityaṁ naro niśchala-mānasaḥjñāna-siddhiṁ labhen nityaṁ tathānte paramaṁ padam [51]
51 One who, with unflickering mind, regularly chants these confidential holy names, achieves perfection in divine knowledge, and finally reaches the supreme destination.
पाठेऽसमर्थः सम्पूर्णे तदर्धं पाठमाचरेत् ।तदा गोदानजं पुण्यं लभते नात्र संशयः ॥५२॥
pāṭhe ’samarthaḥ sampūrṇe tad ardhaṁ pāṭham ācharettadā go-dāna-jaṁ puṇyaṁ labhate nātra saṁśayaḥ [52]
52 If one is unable to sing the entire Gītā, half of it should be sung. Then, without doubt, the piety gained by making a gift of cows will be attained.
त्रिभागं पठमानस्तु सोमयागफलं लभेत् ।षडंशं जपमानस्तु गङ्गास्नानफलं लभेत् ॥५३॥
tri-bhāgaṁ paṭhamānas tu soma-yāga-phalaṁ labhetṣaḍ-aṁśaṁ japamānas tu gaṅgā-snāna-phalaṁ labhet [53]
53 One will achieve the fruit of the soma sacrifice by singing one third of the Gītā, and the result of bathing in the Ganges is achieved by chanting a sixth of it.
तथाध्यायद्वयं नित्यं पठमानो निरन्तरम् ।इन्द्रलोकमवाप्नोति कल्पमेकं वसेद्ध्रुवम् ॥५४॥
tathādhyāya-dvayaṁ nityaṁ paṭhamāno nirantaramindra-lokam avāpnoti kalpam ekaṁ vased dhruvam [54]
54 One who unfailingly sings two of its chapters everyday will surely attain residence in the abode of Lord Indra for one millenium.
एकमध्यायकं नित्यं पठते भक्तिसंयुतः ।रुद्रलोकमवाप्नोति गणो भूत्वा वसेच्चिरम् ॥५५॥
ekam adhyāyakaṁ nityaṁ paṭhate bhakti-saṁyutaḥrudra-lokam avāpnoti gaṇo bhūtvā vasech chiram [55]
55 One who sings with devotion one chapter daily will be recognised as an associate of Lord Śiva, and he will attain residence in the abode of Lord Śiva for immeasurable time.
अध्यायार्धञ्च पादं वा नित्यं यः पठते जनः ।प्राप्नोति रविलोकं स मन्वन्तरसमाः शतम् ॥५६॥
adhyāyārdhañ cha pādaṁ vā nityaṁ yaḥ paṭhate janaḥprāpnoti ravi-lokaṁ sa manvantara-samāḥ śatam [56]
56 A person who daily sings one half or only one quarter of a chapter will achieve residence in the abode of the sun for the time of one hundred Manus.
गीतायाः श्लोकदशकं सप्त पञ्च चतुष्टयम् ।त्रिद्व्येकमर्धमथवा श्लोकानां यः पठेन्नरः ।चन्द्रलोकमवाप्नोति वर्षाणामयुतं तथा ॥५७॥
gītāyāḥ śloka-daśakaṁ sapta pañcha chatuṣṭayamtri-dvy-ekam-ardham athavā ślokānāṁ yaḥ paṭhen naraḥchandra-lokam avāpnoti varṣāṇām ayutaṁ tathā [57]
57 A person who faithfully sings ten, seven, five, four, three, two verses, one, or only half a verse of the Gītā, will attain residence on the moon for ten thousand years.
गीतार्धमेकपादञ्च श्लोकमध्यायमेव च ।स्मरंस्त्यक्त्वा जनो देहं प्रयाति परमं पदम् ॥५८॥
gītārdham eka pādañ cha ślokam adhyāyam eva chasmaraṁs tyaktvā jano dehaṁ prayāti paramaṁ padam [58]
58 One who, at the time of leaving the body, remembers half the Gītā, a quarter of the Gītā, one chapter or only one verse of the Gītā—he reaches the supreme destination.
गीतार्थमपि पाठं वा शृणुयादन्तकालतः ।महापातकयुक्तोऽपि मुक्तिभागी भवेज्जनः ॥५९॥
gītārtham api pāṭhaṁ vā śṛṇuyād anta-kālataḥmahā-pātaka-yukto ’pi mukti-bhāgī bhavej janaḥ [59]
59 By singing or hearing the purport of the Gītā at the time of death even a greatly sinful person qualifies for liberation.
गीतापुस्तकसंयुक्तः प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा प्रयाति यः ।स वैकुण्ठमवाप्नोति विष्णुना सह मोदते ॥६०॥
gītā-pustaka-saṁyuktaḥ prāṇāṁs tyaktvā prayāti yaḥsa vaikuṇṭham avāpnoti viṣṇunā saha modate [60]
60 One who is touching the holy book of the Gītā at the time of leaving the body will attain to Vaikuṇṭha and joyfully reside in the association of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu.
गीताध्यायसमायुक्तो मृतो मानुषतां व्रजेत् ।गीताभ्यासं पुनः कृत्वा लभते मुक्तिमुत्तमाम् ॥६१॥
gītādhyāya-samāyukto mṛto mānuṣatāṁ vrajetgītābhyāsaṁ punaḥ kṛtvā labhate muktim uttamām [61]
61 One whose concentration is intent on just one chapter of the Gītā will attain a human birth after death. Then, again studying the Gītā, he achieves the ultimate liberation.
गीतेत्युच्चारसंयुक्तो म्रियमाणो गतिं लभेत् ॥६२॥
gītety-uchchāra-saṁyukto mriyamāṇo gatiṁ labhet [62]
62 One who utters the word ‘Gītā’ at the time of death attains his life’s fulfillment.
यद्यत्कर्म्म च सर्व्वत्र गीतापाठप्रकीर्त्तिमत् ।तत्तत्कर्म्म च निर्द्दोसं भूत्वा पूर्णत्वमाप्नुयात् ॥६३॥
yad yat karma cha sarvatra gītā-pāṭha-prakīrtimattat tat karma cha nirdosaṁ bhūtvā pūrṇatvam āpnuyāt [63]
63 All actions performed along with the singing of the Gītā become purified and successful.
पितॄनुद्दिश्य यः श्राद्धे गीतापाठं करोति हि ।सन्तुष्टाः पितरस्तस्य निरयाद्यान्ति स्वर्गतिम् ॥६४॥
pitṝn-uddiśya yaḥ śrāddhe gītā-pāṭhaṁ karoti hisantuṣṭāḥ pitaras tasya nirayād yānti svargatim [64]
64 A person who sings the Gītā during the performance of obsequial ceremonies satisfies his forefathers, who, being liberated from a hellish existence, ascend to heaven.
गीतापाठेन सन्तुष्टाः पितरः श्राद्धतर्पिताः ।पितृलोकं प्रयान्त्येव पुत्राशीर्व्वादतत्पराः ॥६५॥
gītā-pāṭhena santuṣṭāḥ pitaraḥ śrāddha-tarpitāḥpitṛ-lokaṁ prayānty eva putrāśīrvāda tat parāḥ [65]
65 Satisfied by the offerings accompanied by the singing of the Gītā, the ancestors offer their descendant their blessings and ascend to the heavenly plane known as Pitṛloka.
गीतापुस्तकदानञ्च धेनुपुच्छसमन्वितम् ।कृत्वा च तद्दिने सम्यक्कृतार्थो जायते जनः ॥६६॥
gītā-pustaka-dānañ cha dhenu-puchchha-samanvitamkṛtvā cha tad dine samyak kṛtārtho jāyate janaḥ [66]
66 A person who makes a gift of a book of the Gītā with a yak-tail whisk achieves success in all his endeavours that day.
पुस्तकं हेमसंयुक्तं गीतायाः प्रकरोति यः ।दत्त्वा विप्राय विदुषे जायते न पुनर्भवम् ॥६७॥
pustakaṁ hema-saṁyuktaṁ gītāyāḥ prakaroti yaḥdattvā viprāya viduṣe jāyate na punar bhavam [67]
67 One who makes a gift of a book of the Gītā along with a presentation of gold to a learned brāhmaṇ, never takes birth in the material world again.
शतपुस्तकदानञ्च गीतायाः प्रकरोति यः ।स याति ब्रह्मसदनं पुनरावृत्तिदुर्लभम् ॥६८॥
śata-pustaka-dānañ cha gītāyāḥ prakaroti yaḥsa yāti brahma-sadanaṁ punar-āvṛtti-durlabham [68]
68 One who makes a gift of one hundred copies of the Gītā attains to the plane of the Absolute wherefrom rebirth practically never occurs.
गीतादानप्रभावेन सप्तकल्पमिताः समाः ।विष्णुलोकमवाप्यन्ते विष्णुना सह मोदते ॥६९॥
gītā-dāna-prabhāvena sapta-kalpa-mitāḥ samāḥviṣṇu-lokam avāpyante viṣṇunā saha modate [69]
69 By the potency of making a gift of the Gītā, one attains residence in the abode of Lord Viṣṇu for seven millenniums and joyfully associates with the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu.
सम्यक्श्रुत्वा च गीतार्थं पुस्तकं यः प्रदापयेत् ।तस्मै प्रीतः श्रीभगवान्ददाति मानसेप्सितम् ॥७०॥
samyak śrutvā cha gītārthaṁ pustakaṁ yaḥ pradāpayettasmai prītaḥ śrī-bhagavān dadāti mānasepsitam [70]
70 One who attentively hears the purport of the Gītā and makes a gift of that book to a brāhmaṇ—he brings satisfaction to the Supreme Lord, who blesses him with the fulfillment of all his aspirations.
न शृणोति न पठति गीताममृतरूपिणीम् ।हस्तात्त्यक्त्वामृतं प्राप्तं स नरो विषमश्नुते ॥७१॥
na śṛṇoti na paṭhati gītām-amṛta-rūpiṇīmhastāt tyaktvāmṛtaṁ prāptaṁ sa naro viṣam aśnute [71]
71 A person who neither sings nor hears the nectarean Gītā is like one who has nectar in his hand yet leaves it aside to drink poison.
जनः संसारदुःखार्त्तो गीताज्ञानं समालभेत् ।पीत्वा गीतामृतं लोके लब्ध्वा भक्तिं सुखी भवेत् ॥७२॥
janaḥ saṁsāra-duḥkhārto gītā-jñānaṁ samālabhetpītvā gītāmṛtaṁ loke labdhvā bhaktiṁ sukhī bhavet [72]
72 When persons suffering in this world of death discover the wisdom of the Gītā and drink the nectar of the Gītā, they take refuge in devotion to the Supreme Lord and become truly happy.
गीतामाश्रित्य बहवो भूभुजो जनकादयः ।निर्धूतकल्मषा लोके गतास्ते परमं पदम् ॥७३॥
gītām āśritya bahavo bhū-bhujo janakādayaḥnirdhūta-kalmaṣā loke gatās te paramaṁ padam [73]
73 Many saintly kings such as King Janaka and others took shelter in the wisdom of the Gītā, and becoming purified of all sins, achieved the supreme destination.
गीतासु न विशेषोऽस्ति जनेषूच्चावचेषु च ।ज्ञानेष्वेव समग्रेषु समा ब्रह्मस्वरूपिणी ॥७४॥
gītāsu na viśeṣo ’sti janeṣūchchāvacheṣu chajñāneṣv eva samagreṣu samā brahma-svarūpiṇī [74]
74 Neither high nor low birth qualifies or disqualifies a faithful person in the singing of the Gītā, since of all kinds of knowledge, the Gītā is the embodiment of Brahma and equal to all.
योऽभिमानेन गर्व्वेण गीतानिन्दां करोति च ।स याति नरकं घोरं यावदाहूतसम्प्लवम् ॥७५॥
yo ’bhimānena garveṇa gītā-nindāṁ karoti chasa yāti narakaṁ ghoraṁ yāvad āhūta-samplavam [75]
75 A person who out of egoism and pride blasphemes the Gītā will have to reside in terrible hell up to the time of the universal annihilation.
अहंकारेण मूढात्मा गीतार्थं नैव मन्यते ।कुम्भीपाकेषु पच्येत यावत्कल्पक्षयो भवेत् ॥७६॥
ahaṅkāreṇa mūḍhātmā gītārthaṁ naiva manyatekumbhī-pākeṣu pachyeta yāvat kalpa-kṣayo bhavet [76]
76 That foolish person who, deluded by egoism, disregards the purport of the Gītā must remain boiling in oil in the hell known as Kumbhīpāka until the annihilation at the end of the millenium.
गीतार्थं वाच्यमानं यो न शृणोति समासतः ।स शूकरभवां योनिमनेकामधिगच्छति ॥७७॥
gītārthaṁ vāchyamānaṁ yo na śṛṇoti samāsataḥsa śūkara-bhavāṁ yonim anekām adhigachchhati [77]
77 One who makes much of speaking about the purport of the Gītā yet never properly hears about it, repeatedly takes birth as a hog.
चौर्य्यं कृत्वा च गीतायां पुस्तकं यः समानयेत् ।न तस्य सफलं किञ्चित्पठनञ्च वृथा भवेत् ॥७८॥
chauryaṁ kṛtvā cha gītāyāṁ pustakaṁ yaḥ samānayetna tasya saphalaṁ kiñchit paṭhanañ cha vṛthā bhavet [78]
78 A person who obtains the book of Gītā by theft is unsuccessful in all his endeavours, and even his attempt to sing the Gītā will be in vain.
यः श्रुत्वा नैव गीताञ्च मोदते परमार्थतः ।नैव तस्य फलं लोके प्रमत्तस्य यथा श्रमः ॥७९॥
yaḥ śrutvā naiva gītāñ cha modate paramārthataḥnaiva tasya phalaṁ loke pramattasya yathā śramaḥ [79]
79 One who, hearing the Gītā, does not experience spiritual joy—his life is fruitless, like the labour of one deluded.
गीतां श्रुत्वा हिरण्यञ्च भोज्यं पट्टाम्बरं तथा ।निवेदयेत्प्रदानार्थं प्रीतये परमात्मनः ॥८०॥
gītāṁ śrutvā hiraṇyañ cha bhojyaṁ paṭṭāmbaraṁ tathānivedayet pradānārthaṁ prītaye paramātmanaḥ [80]
80 To please the Supreme Lord, after hearing the Gītā one should offer gold, food, and silken cloth to a Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇ.
वाचकं पूजयेद्भक्त्या द्रव्यवस्त्राद्युपस्करैः ।अनेकैर्बहुधा प्रीत्या तुष्यतां भगवान्हरिः ॥८१॥
vāchakaṁ pūjayed bhaktyā dravya-vastrādy upaskaraiḥanekair bahudhā prītyā tuṣyatāṁ bhagavān hariḥ [81]
81 To satisfy the Supreme Lord Hari, one must worship the speaker of the Gītā with devotion, offering him cloth and many worshipful presentations.
सूत उवाच ।
माहात्म्यमेतद्गीतायाः कृष्णप्रोक्तं पुरातनम् ।गीतान्ते पठते यस्तु यथोक्तफलभाग्भवेत् ॥८२॥
sūta uvācha
māhātmyam etad gītāyāḥ kṛṣṇa-proktaṁ purātanamgītānte paṭhate yas tu yathokta-phala-bhāg bhavet [82]
82 Sūta Goswāmī said: These eternal glories of the Gītā are sung by the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. One who sings the glories of the Gītā on completion of singing the Gītā can partake of the fruits of the Gītā as mentioned herein.
गीतायाः पठनं कृत्वा माहात्म्यं नैव यः पठेत् ।वृथा पाठफलं तस्य श्रम एव उदाहृतः ॥८३॥
gītāyāḥ paṭhanaṁ kṛtvā māhātmyaṁ naiva yaḥ paṭhetvṛthā pāṭha-phalaṁ tasya śrama eva udāhṛtaḥ [83]
83 The attempt to sing the Gītā is but fruitless labour for a person who neglects to conclude with singing the glories of the Gītā.
एतन्माहात्म्यसंयुक्तं गीतापाठं करोति यः ।श्रद्धया यः शृणोत्येव परमां गतिमाप्नुयात् ॥८४॥
etan māhātmya-saṁyuktaṁ gītā-pāṭhaṁ karoti yaḥśraddhayā yaḥ śṛṇoty eva paramāṁ gatim āpnuyāt [84]
84 One who with heart’s faith hears or sings the Gītā, complete with the glories of the Gītā, reaches the supreme destination.
श्रुत्वा गीतामर्थयुक्तां माहात्म्यं यः शृणोति च ।तस्य पुण्यफलं लोके भवेत्सर्व्वसुखावहम् ॥८५॥
śrutvā gītām artha-yuktāṁ māhātmyaṁ yaḥ śṛṇoti chatasya puṇya-phalaṁ loke bhavet sarva-sukhāvaham [85]
85 One who with faith hears this meaningful Gītā—song divine, and hears in conclusion the glories of the Gītā, shall reap the fruits of virtue in this world, and his life will be filled with joy.
इति श्रीवैष्णवीयतन्त्रसारे श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतामाहात्म्यं सम्पूर्णम्।सम्पूर्णोऽयं ग्रन्थः। श्री कृष्णार्पणमस्तु।
iti śrī-vaiṣṇavīya-tantra-sāre śrīmad-bhagavad-gītā-māhātmyaṁ sampūrṇamsampūrṇo ’yaṁ granthaḥśrī kṛṣṇārpaṇam astu
Thus is completed The Glories of Śrī Gītāfrom the Śrī-Vaiṣṇavīya-tantra-sāra.Thus is completed Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā,The Hidden Treasure of the Sweet Absolute.May Śrī Kṛṣṇa mercifully accept this offering.
Contents
Maṅgalācharaṇam Auspicious Invocation
Preface
Introduction
Chapter One Sainya-darśana Observing the Armies
Chapter Two Sāṅkhya-yoga The Constitution of the Soul
Chapter Three Karma-yoga The Path of Action
Chapter Four Jñāna-yoga The Path of Knowledge
Chapter Five Karma-sannyāsa-yoga The Path of Renunciation of Action
Chapter Six Dhyāna-yoga The Path of Meditation
Chapter Seven Jñāna-vijñāna-yoga Knowledge and Realisation of the Supreme
Chapter Eight Tāraka-brahma-yoga The Merciful Absolute
Chapter Nine Rāja-guhya-yoga The Hidden Treasure of Devotion
Chapter Ten Vibhūti-yoga The Divine Glories of the Lord
Chapter Eleven Viśva-rūpa-darśana-yoga The Vision of the Universal Form
Chapter Twelve Bhakti-yoga The Path of Devotion
Chapter Thirteen Prakṛti-puruṣa-viveka-yoga Distinction Between Matter and Spirit
Chapter Fourteen Guṇatraya-vibhāga-yoga The Three Divisions of Material Nature
Chapter Fifteen Puruṣottama-yoga The Supreme Person
Chapter Sixteen Daivāsura-sampad-vibhāga-yoga The Godly and Ungodly Natures
Chapter Seventeen Śraddhātraya-vibhāga-yoga The Three Types of Faith
Chapter Eighteen Mokṣa-yoga The Path of Liberation
The Glories of the Gītā
The Glories of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā from Śrī-Vaiṣṇavīya-tantra-sāra