SUBJECTIVE
EVOLUTION
OF CONSCIOUSNESSAll Glories to Sri Guru and Gauranga
SUBJECTIVE
EVOLUTION
OF CONSCIOUSNESS
The Play
of the
Sweet Absolute
His Divine Grace
SRILABHAKTI RAKSHAK
SRIDHAR DEV-GOSWAMI
MAHARAJ
SRICHAITANYA SARASWAT MATH© 1989
All rights reserved by the Successor President-acharya
, Kolerganj,
P.O. Box Nabadwip, Dist. Nadia, W. Bengal Pin 741302, India
First Printing 1989   3,000 Copies
by Guardian of Devotion Press
Second Printing  1998  2,500 copies
By Ananta Printing and Publishing
2827 S. Rodeo Gulch Rd.  #3, Soquel, California 95073
(831) 464-9045     email: ananta@ananta-press.com
Edited by Bhakti Sudhir Goswami
and Swami Bhakti Vidhan Mahayogi
Assisted by Alwarnatha Prabhu, Vidagdha Madhava Prabhu,
Bhakta Priya Devi, Ananga Manjari Devi,
Ranamanda Prabhu, Jayananda Prabhu and Mukunda Prabhu
Contributions made by the following devotees:
Sripad Tripurari Swami Maharaja, Yadhamanyu Seva Vikrama
Prabhu, Sri Balarama Prabhu and Divya Sari Devi
Special thanks to the following devotees for their help with this
current edition: Swami B.P. Janardan, Swami B.C. Parvat,
Navadwip Prabhu, Sarvabhavana Prabhu, Ananta Krishna
Prabhu, Tilak DeviContents
PREFACE 7
FOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM , &THECOSMOS 15
THECREATION 37
CONSCIOUSNESS &EVOLUTION 49
THEPLANE OF MISCONCEPTION 61
A F LOATING WORLD OF EXPERIENCE 73
THESIS , ANTITHESIS , &SYNTHESIS 99
THESUPER SUBJECT 115
SCIENCE VS . NESCIENCE 121
SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION 133
PUREDEVOTION 141
THESUBJECTIVE BHAGAVAD -GªT• 151
THEG•YATR ªMANTRA 169
ABOUT THEAUTHOR 179Preface
Evolution is generally thought of as something objective.
But objective evolution is a misperception of reality. Evolu-tion is actually based on consciousness, which is subjective.Subjective evolution, however, seems to be objective evolu-tion to the ignorant.
In ignorance we think of ourselves as subjects, although
in reality the Lord is the subject and we are His objects.We think of ourselves as proprietors although we are Hisproperty.
It is said that all things happen by the will of the
Vai!@avas, the devotees of the Lord. A Vai!@ava is like afaithful employee who speaks the will of the employer; hehas no will of his own: the will of the pure Vai!@ava isnothing but the will of God. In ignorance, however, we tryto make the Lord our servant, but this is like using a ßåla-
gråma ßilå to crack nuts. The Lord is not an object. He is
the seer, the doer, and the knower – the Supreme Subject– but we foolishly think of ourselves as such.
The concept of subjective evolution is explained in
Srimad-Bhågavatam {10.14.22}:
tasmåd ida^ jagad aße!am asat-svar)pa^ svapnåbham asta-dhi!a@a^ puru-du%kha-du%kham
7“By an illusion created by the Lord the universe appears
to be real, although it is not, just as miseries we suffer in adream are only imaginary.”
Unintelligent people take the subject as an object. It is
ignorance to confuse the eye with the seer, or the brain withthe knower. This is described in Srimad-Bhågavatam
{1.3.31}:
yathå nabhasi meghaughore@ur vå pårthivo ’nileeva^ dra!$ari d\ßyatvamåropitam abuddhibhi%
“The unintelligent equate the sky with the clouds, the
air with the dust particles floating in it, and think that thesky is cloudy or that the air is dirty.’’
Consciousness is not a product of the world; the world
is a product of consciousness. This world is a pervertedreflection of the spiritual world. In the material world, theworld of exploitation, as Darwin says, it is a question ofsurvival of the fittest. We must exploit to survive: j(vo
j(vasya j(vanam. But in the spiritual world, the land of
dedication, everyone is a serving unit. There we will find ahappy life through dedication.
In that supersubjective realm, Sri Krishna is eternally
engaged in his divine play with his most intimate servitors.And as our consciousness evolves through dedication, wewill find our highest prospect there, where we have a partto play in the pastimes of the Sweet Absolute. 8S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSPresident-•chårya Sri Chaitanya Såraswat Ma$h
Srila Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-Goswåm( MahåråjFounder-•chårya Sri Chaitanya Såraswat Ma$h
Srila Bhakti Rakshak Sridhar Dev-Goswåm( MahåråjSrila Bhaktisiddhånta Saraswat( ¢håkuraSrila Gaura Kißora Dåsa Båbaj( MahåråjSrila Bhaktivinoda¢håkuraFossilism,
Hypnotism,
& The Cosmos
This chapter is an excerpt from a conversation between
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj, neurophysiologist Dr. Daniel Murpheyand physical organic chemist Dr. Thoudam Singh
Dr. Singh: When scientists speak of evolution they mean
that life has evolved from matter. I have heard you speak ofevolution with quite a different concept. You say thateverything is evolving from consciousness.
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Yes, consciousness comes first and
then matter. The basis of all things material is conscious-ness, which is spiritual. Consciousness can contactconsciousness directly. When consciousness comes intothe stage of matter, material conception, we experience akind of vague consciousness; first there is hazy conscious-ness and then material consciousness. But everything has itsspiritual side. And as eternal souls, our direct connection isreally only with the conscious aspect of existence. Forexample, the Earth is conceived of as a woman. Accordingto the Vedas , the presiding deity of the Earth is a woman.
And the sun is conceived of as a devata , a male god.
15The soul, coming into material consciousness, must
come through some hazy reflection of consciousness,cidåbhåsa . Only then can the soul experience material
consciousness. Before pure consciousness evolves to materialconsciousness, it will pass through a hazy stage of conscious-ness or cidåbhåsa . So in the background of every material
thing, there is a spiritual conception. This cannot but be true.
Dr. Singh: What is cidåbhåsa ?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Something like mind. Suppose
consciousness comes to feel matter. When consciousnessis coming to the material world to know the materialworld, it has to first pass through material consciousness,and then it can feel what is matter. According to Darwin’stheory, matter gradually produces consciousness, but beforeproducing consciousness it must produce some hazyconsciousness, then mind, and then the soul. But in reality,it is just the opposite. So subjective evolution parallelsobjective or material evolution. But in the evolution of con-sciousness, the supersubject is first, then the individualsoul or j(va-subject is next. Then, from the subjective
consciousness of the j(vas , matter is produced. But
consciousness must penetrate hazy consciousness toperceive matter.
I say that the process of evolution moves from the top
downward. The Absolute Reality – if we at all assert thatthere is anything which is the absolute reality – mustpossess two qualifications. What is that? First, in the wordsof Hegel, He must be by Himself: He is his own cause.16 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSSecond  – and more important to us, He is for Himself: He
exists to fulfill His own purpose. He is not subservient toany other entity, for then His position would be secondary.Reality the Absolute is full in Himself. All other thingsare coming from Him. The perfect substance already exists.What appears to us as imperfect comes down according toour own defective senses.
The imperfect must be dependent upon the perfect,
the ultimate reality. And the imperfect may be so arrangedby Him in order to prove His perfection. To prove theperfection of the Absolute, there is conditioned and uncon-ditioned, finite and infinite reality. The defective worldtherefore has an indirect relation to the truth.
However, consciousness cannot jump at once into the
conception of matter; it must pass through a process tocome to material consciousness. From the marginal position,from the verge of the higher eternal potency, evolution anddissolution of this material world begins. This takes placeonly on the outskirts of svar)pa-ßakti , which is the system
responsible for the evolution of the spiritual plane, and is aneternally evolving dynamic whole. It is not that nondiffer-entiation is the origin of differentiation. An eternally differ-entiated substance exists. That plane is filled with l(lå,
dynamic pastimes. If a static thing can be conceived of aseternal, then why can’t a dynamic thing be conceived of aseternal? That plane of s var)pa-ßakti is fully evolved within.
It is eternal. Evolution and dissolution concern only thedegradation of the subtle spirit to the gross material platformand his evolution towards perfection. Here there is evolutionFOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 17and dissolution, but these things do not exist in the eternal
abode of svar)pa-ßakti .
Dr. Singh: Objective evolution is what modern science
calls Darwinian evolution, but how does subjective evolu-tion unfold in Krishna conscious science?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: You have to take the example of
hypnotism. Through a form of mystic “hypnotism,’’ thesupersubject controls the subject to see a particular thing,and he is bound to see that. One may think that as we seea stone, the stone compels us to see it as stone, but it is justthe opposite: we are compelled to see it as stone beingunder the influence of the supersubject who displays every-thing as He likes. When He commands, “See stone,” thenwe shall see stone. Full control over whatever we see restsin His hands. No power to control what we see rests in theobjective world. The objective world is fully controlled bythe subjective. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-g(tå, whereKrishna says paßya me yogam aißvaryam : “If I say, ‘Behold my
mystic power,’ you are bound to see it. You have no otherchoice.”
Krishna says matta% sm~tir jånam apohana^ ca : He is
the prime cause of remembrance, forgetfulness, and intel-ligence. He is the controller. For His own pleasure, Hisl(lå, He can do anything. This is true not only in the
material world, but also in His own domain. What ismeant by this statement of the G(tå concerns this
bra%månda , this material world. The gist of this state-
ment is that from the lower planetary systems up to the18 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESShighest – this entire area of evolution and dissolution –
everything is manipulated by Him. No credit can beattached to any external thing. All credit should go tothe Center who controls everything.
And reality is subjective. It is based on consciousness.
Color is perceived through the eye. It is not that the coloris there and the eye can catch it. But the seer sees throughthe eye and perceives color. So color is a perception. Its posi-tion as actual substance should be traced to the subtleplane of existence. This is the nature of reality: the gross iscoming from the subtle. In Så&khya philosophy, of course,that is described as a bifurcated thing. According to Så&khyaphilosophy, there are three branches of reality: the sense, thesenses, and the sense objects. Sound is created by the ear,color is produced by the eye, and so on.
The objects of the senses are in the mode of ignorance,
tama-gu@a , the sensual instruments are in the mode of
passion, råja-gu@a , and the power of sensation is in the
mode of goodness, sattva-gu@a . From these proceed light,
the eye, and color; sky, the ear, and sound. In this way,mundane reality branches in three ways: tama , råja, and
sattva . So the gross world is coming from the subtle through
the channel of consciousness. The feeler, the instrument ofperception, is creating the object of his perception.
Try to understand this principle of hypnotism. The
whole thing is hypnotism – this whole creation – and it iscompletely in the hand of the Supreme Subject. All mate-rial laws have no meaning; the laws and the sublaws are allpertaining to the subjective world.FOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 19Dr. Murphey: But how can one perceive this sort of hypno-
tism?
Srila Sridhara Mahåråja: How can we know beforehand
that in a laboratory, combining hydrogen and oxygen – twogases – will produce water? Only when one comes to aparticular stage of scientific knowledge can he know that amore subtle thing like gas can produce a tangible materialthing like water. In that way, when you have an idea of thehigher substance, then you can understand how from thesubtle, the gross has originated.
The relative world is a perverted reflection of the absolute
reality. Highly qualified things must be given the positionof causal importance. It is not that a lower thing can producea higher thing, but it is easy for a higher thing to producesomething lower. This is not difficult to understand.
The modern scientific position is saying basically that
stone can produce soul; but why not consider that soulcan produce stone? We have to inquire about that process– how the soul can produce stone. But we have done awaywith that and instead we say that stone is graduallyproducing soul – we are very fond of investigating in thatline. Why? The subtle should be given more importancethan the gross. Why should we think that man has createdGod, and not that God has created man?
Dr. Singh: Then God is the magician and we are His
subjects?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Not only is He a magician, but20 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSthe Super-magician. He is
not merely the kind ofmagician that is within ourexperience.
Dr. Murphey: What is the
role of Yogamåyå , the
Lord’s internal potency?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: She
is found in the eternalcompany of Krishna. Inour conception of divinity,puru!a/prak~ti , the mascu-
line/feminine, are existingtogether. Potent andpotency, substance andpotency, are inconceivablyinterconnected. Otherwise, if we conceive of the SupremeSoul as existing independent of any potency, that will be thebrahman conception of Ía@karåcarya: ultimate conscious-
ness as non-differentiated oneness. So the Absolute Truthincludes both potent and potency – puru!a/prak~ti –
consciousness with energy.
Actually there are three main elements to be traced
within divinity: jåna, bala , and kr(ya. The eternal aspect of
the absolute whole is divided in three ways: energy,consciousness, and ecstasy. Thinking, willing and feeling.Sat, cit, ånanda .Sat, the potency for maintaining existence,
is the potency of Baladeva { bala}.
Cit, the aspect ofFOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 21
The modern scientific position
is saying basically that stonecan produce soul; but why notconsider that soul can producestone?consciousness, is Våsudeva { jåna }. And ånanda , ecstatic
feeling, is Rådhikå { kriya }. Jåna, bala, kr(ya {knowledge,
strength, feeling}; sat, cit, ånanda {eternity, cognition,
bliss}; sandh(n(, samv(t, hlådin( {existence, realization,
ecstasy}: Baladeva, Krishna, Rådhårån(. These are the threephases of advaya-jåna , or the one whole. The one whole
can be thought of in its primary, evolved stage in threeways: main consciousness, main energy, and main satis-faction. In three phases we are to conceive of that ulti-mate reality. It is there: jåna, bala, kr(ya ca . Thinking,
feeling, willing. Sat, cit, ånanda . Satyam, ßivam, sundaram
{eternity, auspiciousness, beauty}. And these three princi-ples are expressed through evolution and dissolution inthe eternal and non-eternal.
These aspects of theism have been dealt with in a very
scientific way in the Sri K±!@a Sa^hitå of Bhaktivinoda
¢håkura. Once, I considered from this point of view thequestion of the planets in Vedic cosmology. We see that bythe movement of the different planets, a solar eclipse iscaused by the moon’s shadow falling upon the Earth. Andyet in the scriptures it has been described that during aneclipse, the planet Råhu is devouring the sun or the moon.When Srila Bhaktisiddhånta Saraswat( ¢håkura was inPur( during his last days and an eclipse came, one devoteewho was supposed to know siddhånta , the conclusions of
scripture, was sitting next to Prabhupåda. He suddenlyridiculed the idea given in the Bhågavatam that during a
solar or lunar eclipse Råhu devours the sun or moon.
I could not tolerate that such a remark should be passed22 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSin regard to the Bhågavatam and argued that what Srimad-
Bhågavatam has stated is not to be taken lightly. I offered
what seemed like some far-fetched support. I said that in hisJaiva Dharma , Bhaktivinoda ¢håkura has created so many
characters, but I think that they are not imaginary. Whathe has written might have occurred during some othermillennium { kalpa }, or day of Brahmå, and that has now
come to the surface. In this way I went on to support thecosmological position of the Bhågavatam by arguing that
what is necessary to prove reality must also have some realposition. It cannot but be. In this way my argument wentand Prabhupåda supported me.
In understanding the position of the planet Råhu, what
Íukadeva and Vyåsadeva have said is geographically impos-sible, but their statements are there in Srimad-Bhågavatam ,
and the literal meaning of the scriptures is not to be takenlightly. Considering the importance of the literal meaningof scripture, Bhaktivedånta Swåm( Mahåråja presentedBhagavad-g(tå As It Is . I thought, “How am I to prove
what the Bhågavatam says? I don’t know. But what is said
in Srimad- Bhågavatam must be true. I have faith in that.”
There are so many statements on the cosmology of the
universe in the scriptures. The Aryans, the spiritually devel-oped men of former times, used to see everything asconsciousness. They saw that the shadow is also conscious.The shadow, åbhåsa , is also considered to be a stage of
consciousness. Only through that shadowy stage ofconsciousness can we come to the material conception ofa thing. Before we reach the conception of a shadow, weFOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 23must pass through some mental stage, and personification
may be attached to that mental stage. The personificationof the shadow may be referred to as “Råhu.”
The soul approaches matter, the material world, but
before that, he must pass through a shadowy stage ofconsciousness called cidåbhåsa . Consciousness passes
through the shadow level of consciousness into matter,non-consciousness. And that shadow stage of consciousnesshas its personality. It is also conscious, and may be knownas “Råhu.”
Every material conception presupposes a spiritual
conception of that particular thing. The shadow throughwhich consciousness must pass in order to perceive thingsas material has personality, and in the Bhågavatam , the
~!is, the seers of the truth, are addressing it as Råhu. Because
they are highly developed, they find the personal aspect ofexistence everywhere. What we perceive to be dead matter,they perceive to be conscious. Therefore, they always takethe personal perspective.
The soul, when going to experience any material concep-
tion, will have to pass through a medium which influenceshis consciousness to see things as material. What is concretematter is unknown. It is a mere effect of consciousness. Aseverything material must have some conscious origin, ororigin in personal consciousness, there must be a personalconception of the sun, the moon, the Earth, and all theplanets. Before we reach the conception of a shadow or anyother object, the soul has to pass through a conscious stage.That stage has some spiritual existence as a person. There-24 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSfore the Bhågavatam refers to the sun, the moon, and the
planet Råhu, as persons. Everything – the Earth, the moon,the stars, the planets – has a personal conception. In thebackground of what we can perceive with our dull senses,everything that is said to be matter, there must be a personalconception. Without the influence of a personal concep-tion, consciousness cannot reach the stage of gross matter.
Therefore, in the ancient scriptures we find that the
great sages and ~!isare always addressing everything within
this world as a person. Although to us it is dead matter, theyhave considered them as persons. Why? The matter israther the shadow of the personal entity. The personal,conscious entity is more real, and the matter we perceivethrough dimmed consciousness is less real.
Dr. Murphey: So that shadow is Råhu?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: When we conceive of the personal
representation of that shadow, it will be known as Råhu.Everything is conscious. The shadow, its effect – every-thing. When the moon is between the sun and the Earth,the shadow of the moon is coming here, and what iscoming is also conscious. Everything is conscious first – thenthere is matter. From the personal conception things evolveto gross consciousness. It is all personal. So the ~!is with such
a vision of reality used to address everything as a person: thetrees, the mountains, the sun, the moon, the ocean. Whenpure consciousness is coming to experience pure matter,then there must first be some mixed stage, and that is aperson suffering in karma . Person means they are not aFOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 25fully developed spiritual person at present, but in a mixed
condition. So what the ~!is are saying – that everything is a
person – is real; it is not a concoction.
Everything is conscious. As the present scientists say
everything is matter, we have real cause to think that every-thing is conscious. Whatever you see does not matter; wecan directly feel what is in our nature. That is conscious.Our consciousness may be in a developed or degradedposition, but consciousness is nearer to us. We feel ourmental energy only.
Dr. Murphey: This is a bit difficult for us to fully grasp.
When we see color, what are we actually seeing?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: That is a mental stage.
Dr. Singh: What is the reality of that object?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Reality – that is in the soul. Only
the soul is real; the seer is reality. The subject is real. Andwhatever the subject feels also emanates from the subject.
Dr. Singh: But are the objects the subject perceives also
persons? When we are seeing the color red, now is red alsoa personality?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Everything has its representation in
the original, personal, conscious, spiritual reality. Otherwise,there is no possibility of its being reflected into this planeas matter. First there is consciousness and then when it isin a more gross condition, it appears to be matter. In thestudy of ontology it is taught that when studying a partic-26 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSular thing, although we can know that it has certain attrib-
utes to the eye, and that it appears to the ear in a particularway, these are all appearances. Independent of appearances,the ontological aspect of a thing – what it is, the reality ofa thing – is unknown and unknowable. My contention isthat when consciousness is going to feel non-consciousmatter it will have to pass through a conscious area tomeet the material object. So the full perception of thatmaterial thing cannot but be conscious; and conscious-ness always indicates person. First there is conception andthen the material idea.
The conscious world is very near and the material world
is very far off. Therefore the great ~!is, whose thinking is
highly developed, address whatever they find within theenvironment as if they are all persons. In the Vedas , the
ancient scriptural literature of India, we find that the saintsand sages are always in the midst of so many persons; in thebackground everything is a person.
Dr. Murphey: And person means thinking, feeling, willing.
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Thinking, feeling, willing – a living
entity has three phases. And it is also the same with Godand his potency. There is a subject existing first, and thenhis experiences. And experiences of the subtlemost charactercome first and are given the most importance. And whenthe subject is coming to the more distant area to conceiveof matter, that will be the farthest point from him. Hewill address everything by which he is surrounded withpersonal conceptions.FOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 27A personal conception cannot but assert that matter is far
off. The direct connection of consciousness is with theshadow, the reflection of the material into the consciousworld. The soul can understand that only. If matter can existindependently, then also matter has a shadow in theconscious world and the soul is concerned with that shadow.
In other words, there is the person and then the body.
Just as the body is the after-effect of the conscious livingagent, matter is the after-effect of spirit. Irrespective of allmaterial consciousness, that which is in direct contact withsoul is all personal. Cidåbhåsa is something like the mental
substance we have within.
There are two kinds of persons, k!ara and ak!ara : the
pure liberated soul and the soul who is struggling in matter.When liberated and non-liberated persons are mixed withinthe world of material transactions, whether as moving ornon-moving entities, or whatever their position might be,still they should be considered persons. Since everything isa unit of consciousness, everything has personal existence.
Dr. Murphey: So externally we see the Ganges as water, but
in reality she is a person.
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: Everything is a person. Before we go
to the material conception, we must pass through thepersonal conception or aspect of that thing. In V~@dåvanaeverything is conscious, but some things are posing in apassive way. But they are all conscious: the Yamunå river,the cows, the trees, the fruit – everything is conscious,spiritual, but they pose in different ways. Being able to28 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESSdetect the conscious characteristic in everything, the Aryans
saw all of nature as conscious and personal, and addressedeverything as conscious.
Consciousness and personality are the universal basis of
reality. Whatever we may experience is conscious. Thereflection of a material object is within me, and the planewithin me is conscious. The subject is consciousness, andwhatever kind of thing the object may be, it casts its reflec-tion into the plane of consciousness. The observer of anyobjective reality is involved only with consciousness frombeginning to end, and can have no conception of matterapart from consciousness.
Dr. Murphey: How can we differentiate consciousness
from mind?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: In Bhagavad-g(tå the path of dif-
ferentiation between consciousness and mind is suggested:indriyå@i parå@y åhur . What is åtmå, the soul, the spiritual
conception? We have come to the world conception by aparticular process. By the process of elimination we can traceout what the mind is. It is said that the basis of the mindis acceptance and rejection: sa&kalpa-vikalpa – “I want
this, I don’t want that.’’ What is the mind? A thing thatcontains apathy and sympathy for the external world. Thatis the mind. We have to trace within us what that thing is.It is within us, and one has to enter into his own self andtry to have some personal experience of what the mind is.Then by internal analysis one can try to come directly intouch with the faculty of judgment, reason, intelligence, byFOSSILISM , HYPNOTISM & T HECOSMOS 29asking, “What is intelligence? Where is it within me?” We
should try to find that out and come in touch with thatdirectly. We should inquire, “What is the mind? It isalready within me. But what is it? And what is reasonwithin me? What is the source of the mind and intelli-gence? And crossing the stage of the decisive faculty, whatis the soul?” We must try, as a yogi does, to come in directtouch with the elements within us. Mind and intelligenceare within each of us. Why should we not be able to traceout exactly what they are, to see internally what they are?
Dr. Murphey: When our faith is growing in a particular
direction, how can we know that our realizations arecoming from our own internal self, from our innerconsciousness, and not from the influence of the environ-ment, the circumstances that surround us?
Srila Sridhar Mahåråj: The self is in a dormant state, but
by some external help it may be reawakened, just as whenone is sleeping, by external interference a man can beroused. It is something like that. Someone is dormant,but when, by external help, he awakes from his slumber, heagain becomes aware of himself. Once he is awakened andhis self-awareness has returned, he immediately knows, “Iwas such and such; I am such and such.” By the help of ourfriends we may recover our health. In the same way, if wecontinue to apply the process of bhakti , we shall become
more and more conscious of our self and of reality. We areour own guarantee.30 S UBJECTIVE EVOLUTION OFCONSCIOUSNESS